## CHAPTER 3

## The Problems with Popularity

## What’s Wrong with What We Want?

In the center of Rome, nestled comfortably among historic landmarks like St. Vincenzo’s Church and the United Colors of Benetton, sits the Trevi Fountain. It is a glorious site, with over one hundred thousand cubic feet of water pouring through its aqueducts hourly. Every day it is surrounded by people who marvel at its beauty and listen to its endless roar. They take pictures, they sit nearby to have coffee, and the vast majority throw in a coin to make a wish. About three thousand euros’ worth of coins are tossed into the fountain every day, representing thousands of wishes from all over the world.

What does everyone typically wish for?

_I wish to win the lottery._

_I wish I were ten pounds thinner._

_I wish to become famous._

_I wish for a promotion._

_I wish to fall in love._

_I wish my family happiness and health._

_I wish for no more war or suffering._

What would you wish for? Research studies have posed this question to adults from all over the world. Some studies have reframed the idea by asking people to report their “fundamental motives”—in other words, the deepest desires that drive their behavior. Others have investigated life longings, or what Germans call _Sehnsucht_. Still other researchers have analyzed subjects’ most important “aspirational goals.”

Results from all these studies reveal that while our wishes depend a bit on our age, our gender, our personality, and even where we are when we are asked, we all basically want the same things. Psychologists can group all of our wishes into just two main categories.

One of these categories includes our “intrinsic” desires—wishes that make us feel good without needing any external recognition or feedback. Psychologists posit that these intrinsic goals are inherently fulfilling because they make us feel as if we are honoring our own internal values. They promote psychological growth and self-actualization—in other words, they make us the best people we can possibly be. Intrinsic goals include our desire to feel connected to others, to find love, and to be healthy and happy. Altruistic wishes (e.g., desiring happiness for our loved ones or an end to world hunger) are a reflection of our intrinsic desires, because when we seek to help others, it feels good, even if no one else is aware of our benevolent intentions.

In one study, a group of psychologists asked 405 young adults, “If you could have three wishes, what would you wish for?” The results revealed fewer intrinsic wishes than might be expected. About 13 percent wished for happiness, and 12 percent wished for social intimacy, including “positive relationships with family and friends.” Only about 8 percent chose an altruistic wish. Others (6 percent) made a wish pertaining to physical health or the health of a loved one; this type of wish becomes more common as we grow older.

The other category of wishes has a great deal to do with popularity. This is not the kind of popularity based on likability, but rather one grounded in status and all of its trappings. Researchers refer to these types of wishes as “extrinsic,” because they are defined by a desire to be regarded favorably by others. Extrinsic desires are satisfied only when other people notice us and give us positive feedback, so fulfilling them is out of our own control.

Common extrinsic wishes are craving fame and attention (e.g., “to be admired by many people,” “to have my name be known by everyone”), as well as power and dominance (“to be able to influence people”). Extrinsic wishes also include those qualities that we associate with high status, like beauty (“to have people comment how good I look”) and excessive wealth (“to have many expensive things”). No matter how the questions are posed or who the participants are, research reveals that at least one of the subjects’ top three wishes usually is extrinsic, with fame or attention being particularly common. Power (especially for men) and beauty (for women) are also typically in the top five. Ultimately we all want to be admired and influential—and maybe even a little envied.

Is this so wrong? Is it shallow? Immature? Maybe a little vain? Is there a part of us that still wants to live out our high school glory days, or fulfill a wish that was never granted in adolescence? Do we really still want this type of popularity?

I must confess, although I am not terribly active on Facebook, I do have an account that enables me to keep up-to-date with friends and colleagues who might otherwise fall out of touch. I occasionally post a picture of my family, and after a few days, and several pestering emails from Facebook, I log back in to see what I have missed. At the top of the screen is a little icon showing me that there has been activity on my account. When I click, it announces that dozens of people have “liked” or commented on the photo I posted. I didn’t upload the picture just to accrue some impressive number of “likes,” but I can’t help but feel a little uplifted knowing that so many people saw and approved of something I offered. Of course, this recognition has nothing to do with people actually liking me, despite Facebook’s clever use of the word. It is, rather, a simple way for them to indicate that they saw my picture, and it made them smile. It seems that the fundamental purpose of “liking,” retweeting, or offering any other form of endorsement on social media is to join the herd that says, “I see you. I notice you. I approve of you.” It is a way of granting people high status—showing them that they are visible and admired by many. And the tactic works. When I see the number of “likes,” it makes me feel . . . well, popular. It seems juvenile to admit it, but it offers a little bit of a rush, a small pat on the back, a feeling of being reinforced.

We typically look down on people who openly crave high status. Seeking this type of popularity is the kind of pursuit we associate with preteens and boy bands. We even use derogatory names for adults who seem to brazenly pursue status, like “status-seekers,” “wannabes,” or “fame-mongers.”

But is it wrong to desire high status? It’s certainly more socially advantageous to have this type of popularity than not. Imagine attending a party where everyone is excited to talk with you, amused by what you say, and impressed by how great you look. Consider how gratifying it would feel if, at every work meeting, your ideas were heralded as the most inspired and influential. Think how special you would feel if people were excited just to meet you and talked favorably about you afterward. Who wouldn’t want to be venerated by all their peers? This recognition appeals to all of us, just as all of us do secretly feel a little boost when we get “likes” on our Facebook page, or when we receive lots of invitations to parties and get-togethers. Why? It’s not appealing because we are still vying for a spot on the “Most Popular” senior celebrities page in our high school yearbook—it actually has a much deeper basis. Our pursuit of status can be traced back to the most primitive of origins.

—

Deep within our brains, in a part of the limbic system that sits below the cerebral cortex, is a region that has been part of our anatomy for thousands of years and is found not only in humans but also in other mammals. It’s part of a network of coactivating substructures, but the area that may have most relevance is called the ventral striatum. The ventral striatum is a hub in our brain’s reward center and as such plays a major role in making us feel good. It responds to all kinds of rewards, from the promise of money to the high that comes from using drugs. But beginning in adolescence, the ventral striatum becomes especially activated when we experience rewards that are social in nature. One of its chief functions is to make us care about status.

The ventral striatum is among the first parts of the brain to change at puberty. This is highly adaptive. About the time that our output of testosterone and progesterone begins to surge—even before our voices change and our sexual interests develop—our bodies prepare us to become autonomous. A first step in doing so is to help us separate from our parents and become more interested in our peers.

This interest is stimulated by a cocktail of neurochemicals. Our feelings, sensations, urges, and behaviors are all triggered by the activity of neurons in our central nervous system. These neurons each have receptors that are keyed to specific hormones, neurotransmitters, or other substances that signal the neuron to fire or not. When we are about ten to thirteen years old, our pubertal hormones stimulate the neurons in the ventral striatum to grow additional receptors for two brain substances in particular.

One of these is a hormone called oxytocin, which increases our desire to connect and bond with our peers. Receptors for oxytocin proliferate in many mammals at the onset of adolescence. Even mice prefer time with other teen mice over adults when they begin to mature—a fact that can bring comfort to millions of parents who wonder why they have suddenly become such an embarrassment to their tween children. The second substance is dopamine, the same neurotransmitter that produces the pleasure response triggered by many recreational drugs. Together these neurochemicals make tweens suddenly feel an urge to obtain “social rewards”—feedback that makes them feel noticed, approved, admired, and powerful among peers.

But that’s not all. Our brains are not only designed to make us feel good when we have high status—they are also programmed to make us pursue it. The reason for this is that the ventral striatum rarely acts alone. It’s part of a group of regions that neuroscientists like my colleague Kristen Lindquist call the “motivational relevance network.” Kent Berridge, a neuroscientist from the University of Michigan, is an expert in the motivational relevance network and has studied the brain’s likes and wants—in other words, what feels good and why we so doggedly pursue more of it. His work has revealed that the ventral striatum sends neural outputs to locations throughout the brain, such as the ventral pallidum. The ventral pallidum translates our likes into a strong motivation to act—to get more of what we want. In other words, it affects our behavior and can also affect our emotions. In fact, the ventral pallidum has been linked with a variety of addictions and the emotional attachment we may develop to things we know are not so good for us.

Some of the connections that govern our likes and wants also occur in the cortex, the region of the brain that sits atop the subcortical regions we share with many other species. The cortex is where we think—a process that includes consciously recognizing what we like and deliberating whether or not to pursue it. Among adults, thinking helps restrain us from becoming too obsessed with any of our desires, such as popularity. By our mid-twenties, the rest of our brain has caught up to the early-developing ventral striatum, and the cortex helps us act sensibly, enabling us to resist the urge to fulfill every want.

But many neural connections also occur below the cortex, like the ones between the ventral striatum and ventral pallidum. Berridge explains that these subcortical connections can lead us to pursue certain behaviors without realizing we are doing so, and later, we may even reflect upon them as being irrational—like becoming giddy when we see a celebrity, or blurting out our desires when it is inappropriate to do so. In fact, subcortical connections are so strong that we begin to “want” not just those things that directly give us social rewards, but anything that has been paired with social reward, Pavlovian style. We soon begin to want things that simply remind us of high status, such as beauty or excessive wealth, whether or not they will actually benefit us. Berridge refers to these links as “motivational magnets.”

If you talk to any adolescent, it is easy to see how their wants are related to a craving for social rewards and high status. By the time we are thirteen, it seems as if there is nothing more important to us than this type of popularity. We talk about who has it. We strategize how to get it. We are devastated when we lose it. We even do things we know are wrong, immoral, illegal, or dangerous merely to obtain status, or to fiercely defend it. Adolescents are virtually addicted to popularity—at least the type based on status.

This is exactly what we learn when my graduate students and I meet with teenagers to study their behavior with peers. In fact, this predilection seems to be becoming even more pronounced now that teens can enter a social rewards lottery with every mouse click on social media. When we talk with teens about what’s most important to them, it seems all we hear is a craving for, and strategy to attain, social rewards.

“I want the most Twitter followers in my school,” one subject tells us.

“If I post a pic on Instagram, and it doesn’t get, like, thirty ‘likes’ in the first few minutes, then I take it down,” another says.

“You have to ‘like’ whatever your friend posts right away or you are not being a good friend,” explains a third.

“Why?” we ask them. “Tell us why your social media profiles are so important.”

“It’s like being famous” is a typical response. “It’s cool. Everyone knows you, and you are, like, the most important person in school.”

Or, “If you’re popular, if everyone is talking about you, you can go out with whoever you want. You can be friends with anyone. It just, like, feels good.”

Is this obsession with social media also true of adults? We all know those who use it as fervently as today’s teens—posting incessantly, soliciting attention in the form of “likes” and retweets, and so on. In fact, the ventral striatum remains just as active in adulthood. Granted, as we age we are better able to control these impulses. But for the rest of our lives, we will still experience the drive to gain social rewards and to have high status. The more we learn about the brain, the more we discover how much this desire for status can change us, without our even realizing it.

—

What did you do today to raise your status? Did you pick out attractive clothes to wear so others would notice you? Did you put on an expensive watch that makes you feel powerful or prestigious? Maybe you sent an email to colleagues that you hoped would leverage your influence at work. Or perhaps you just posted on Facebook or Twitter. These are all pretty obvious things we might do to make us feel as if we have higher status, and we’re usually pretty aware of what we are doing when we do make choices like these to gain social rewards.

But is that all? What else reflects our status yearnings? It turns out that our ventral striatum is linked to a much wider range of our behaviors and emotions than we once thought.

For instance, research shows that when we read about high-status people, talk about them, or even just look at them, those actions are sufficient to activate the social reward centers in our brains. In fact, we tend to gaze at high-status peers (of the same or opposite gender) much longer than we look at others around us. In other words, without our even realizing it, our brains habitually orient us toward status all day long.

We also experience social rewards when we believe that someone we admire likes us in return. Anyone who has ever fantasized about meeting a celebrity and then becoming best friends can relate to this concept. This is not a far cry from the high school yearning to have the most popular kid notice us, and it all can be traced back to the same adolescent surge in our desire for social rewards.

Chris Davey and his colleagues in Australia and Spain tested this idea in a study of adults. They asked participants to review a series of photos of people they had never met before and then to indicate how much they admired each individual. They were led to believe that the subjects in those photos did the same to them. Next, they were placed in an fMRI (functional MRI) scanner and shown the photos again, but this time given information about whether each of the individuals in the photos admired them in return. The reward centers of the brain became active whenever participants believed that others esteemed them. That finding makes sense, as being admired provides us with social rewards. But the most interesting result of the study was that those same brain regions were most strongly activated when participants believed they were admired by their own favorite peers. Gaining approval from those we look up to seems to be particularly valuable to the reward centers.

Research also shows that when we are tempted by social rewards, we are particularly likely to act impulsively. This may explain why so many of us have done regrettable things when we are in the presence of high-status peers.

This was most recently demonstrated by Leah Somerville at Harvard and B. J. Casey at Cornell, who adapted a computer game to determine whether we lose some of our inhibitions when faced with social rewards. The game was simple: participants were asked to press the space bar on a keyboard when they saw one stimulus on-screen, but not when they saw another. When this game is used with letters as the stimuli (e.g., press the space bar when the letter _R_ is displayed, but not when the letter _J_ appears), it can help make a diagnosis of ADHD. But in their study, Somerville and Casey replaced the letters with pictures of smiling or neutral faces, and the participants were placed in an fMRI to have their brains scanned. The researchers found that the sight of smiling pictures offered social rewards—after all, a smile is an instinctual cue of approval, like the approval we get when we have high status. Most relevant, however, was that in the presence of these social rewards, participants performed much more poorly at the task, suggesting that they weren’t able to control their impulses as well. This was especially true of subjects who were adolescents or older. No one is immune to this effect—ask my wife and she’ll tell you about the time we ran into one of my favorite actresses, and I began fawning like a twelve-year-old fan. There is something about status that naturally reduces our inhibitions.

The promise of social rewards can even change our own most basic attitudes and preferences without us even realizing it. Stanford student Erik Nook and psychologist Jamil Zaki investigated what happens in our brain when we conform to others. In their study, Nook and Zaki initially asked adults to report on their liking of different foods (chips, candy, fruits, vegetables), which were displayed in a series of photos. After they rated each item, participants were then shown a statistic that ostensibly reported the average rating of the previous two hundred study participants for the same food. The statistic was bogus, of course, but it enabled the investigators to examine the brain’s response to the opinions of others. As expected, corroboration produced activity in the ventral striatum. We experience social rewards simply by learning that others agree with us.

The investigators then took their experiment one step further. After the participants were presented the bogus feedback, they were asked to rate each food again. Nook and Zaki wanted to see if any of the subjects would change their assessments after hearing how their responses lined up with those of others, even for something as inconsequential as food preferences. Their findings suggested that this is exactly what happened: most everyone conformed to others at least to some degree, but most interestingly, the people most likely to conform were those who had the largest responses in their ventral striatum in the first part of the experiment. The results demonstrated that not only are we biologically primed to enjoy feeling that others agree with us but those of us who have the most dramatic social reward response are especially likely to conform to the views of others. This all takes place outside of our conscious awareness.

Our desire for social rewards doesn’t only affect our behavior. It also has significant effects on our emotions, even our most fundamental feelings about who we are. Adolescence, the stage in our lives when our biological cravings for status are suddenly heightened, is also the period when we first develop our sense of identity.

Ask young children how they feel or what kind of person they are and they will offer answers that are based on whatever happened to them in the last few minutes or hours. But in adolescence, we become more capable of thinking about ourselves in a way that cuts across time and recent experiences. We develop a stable sense of self, and the juxtaposition of our identity development with the rapid increase in ventral striatum activity leads to a process psychologists call “reflected appraisal.” In other words, we begin to base our self-esteem not on how we feel, but on how we gauge that others approve of us. If everyone in homeroom thinks that we’re cool, it means that we _are_ cool. If we are teased or ignored by our peers, we don’t interpret it to mean that they are being mean or rude; rather, we take it as evidence of our own unworthiness. In adolescence, our self-concept is not merely informed by how our peers treat us but is fully dictated by such experiences.

Reflected appraisal continues into adulthood, too, but for some more than others. Many people’s sense of identity seems to be overly influenced by the last bit of positive or negative feedback they received. Hearing that someone likes them makes them feel like a good person, while exclusion turns them into total failures. Some are so invested in having high status (whether fame, beauty, power, or wealth) that it seems as if their entire identity is dependent on it. Neuroscience research supports these observations. We now know that neural outputs from the ventral striatum lead to our brain’s “emotional salience” network, including the amygdala and parts of our hippocampus. These regions influence our emotional arousal, our most meaningful memories, and our experience that something has affected us in a personal and profound manner. Consequently, when we crave social rewards, we don’t feel casually about it but view it as the basis of our self-worth. We may even begin to believe that status is synonymous with contentment. If we are not famous, powerful, beautiful, wealthy, or influential, then we must be worthless. This is not a great recipe for happiness.

—

Do you still long for status? Do you desire motivational magnets—things that you associate with high standing, like beauty or great wealth? How often is your behavior driven by a yearning for extrinsic reward, and to what degree do you allow your inner experience of happiness and self-worth to be influenced by your popularity among peers?

It’s much safer to say popularity sucks, because that allows you to forgive yourself if you suck.

—Cameron Crowe

The truth is, we all want to have a certain degree of status. It is a natural product of our neurochemistry and our developmental history. Enjoying social rewards—feeling the high of exalted status—and seeking even more of it is perfectly normal. It’s when we begin pursuing high status excessively that we can get into trouble.

In contemporary society, there are at least four ways that our pursuit of popularity through increasing status has gone awry.

### POPULARITY PROBLEM #1: 

### How Far Will We Go for Status?

In 1939, a five-year-old girl named Valerie Jane disappeared. For an entire day, her family, neighbors, and the police searched tirelessly for her, but to no avail. The little girl had recently become curious about animals and particularly concerned with one puzzling question: how could something as large as an egg come out of a hen—an animal with no obvious opening to accommodate it? To answer her question, Valerie Jane quietly crawled into a henhouse, covered herself with straw, and lay motionless for the entire afternoon until she watched one of the fowl lay an egg. Only then did she emerge and return safely home.

Valerie Jane grew up to be Dr. Jane Goodall, who at the age of twenty-six quietly entered the Gombe Forest of Tanzania to observe chimpanzees—our closest evolutionary cousins, which share at least 90 percent of our DNA. Over the years, Goodall’s discoveries challenged accepted notions in ethology, revealing that many behaviors originally thought to be unique to humans are also common in other species.

Goodall discovered that chimpanzees want to be popular, too. They don’t brag about how many Twitter followers they have, but they do use status to determine which individual gets first access to resources. Among many animals, the most popular members of a group are young and able to maintain loyalty from others. High-status males typically are strong; females are socially shrewd. Popular chimps get first pick of food and mating partners. Status therefore offers chimpanzees a survival advantage: the more they are attuned to status and driven toward the social rewards it offers, the better chance they have at meeting their basic needs.

Goodall has described a day in the life of a sanctuary built by her foundation to help chimps and other primates return safely to their natural habitat. On a beautiful spring day in the Republic of the Congo, one of these chimps, a female whom Goodall calls Silaho, met some of the new sanctuary residents. Silaho had been transferred there a few months earlier, and in the time since, she had established a community among ten others. She was indisputably the “alpha” of the group. But then three new chimpanzees arrived. Naturally, Silaho did what any host might do when greeting guests: she violently attacked them into submission. Later, she did so again. Ultimately, Goodall explains, Silaho and three others in her group teamed together and tormented the visitors until they fled to the opposite side of the island. These three new chimpanzees remained ostracized from the rest of the community for months, while Silaho’s status remained intact. Goodall, along with many other ethologists studying species in every corner of our planet, suggests that aggressive behavior is one very effective way that animals establish dominance and status among their peers. It is their natural instinct to do so.

Seven thousand miles east of Congo, anthropology professor Don Merten was observing a group of cheerleaders in an American high school. In this school, the cheerleaders ruled. Others looked up to them, they had first access to the most popular boys, and they set the trends that many other girls followed.

When an unpopular girl decided to join the cheerleading squad, Merten reports, the other girls reflexively behaved aggressively toward her. They teased her. They ostracized her. They made sure that her reputation was besmirched across the entire grade.

The cheerleaders knew their treatment of her was mean, and even recognized that it would earn them reputations as stuck-up snobs. It didn’t matter. Merten’s research suggests that the function of aggression is to protect the exclusivity that defines status itself. It is a necessary evil to maintain dominance. The cheerleaders explained to Merten that allowing a lower-status girl to join their group would come with a cost—a decline in the squad’s status. His work subsequently demonstrated that each time a high-status teen acted aggressively in school, whether toward someone in his group or even someone similarly high in status, it was to preserve the social hierarchy. A punch in the face or the start of a nasty rumor was an act of dominance, letting victims and onlookers alike know the boundaries that defined status in that school. Threats to the social order are sanctioned by publically forcing submissiveness.

Psychologists refer to this type of hostile behavior as “proactive aggression,” and research suggests that it is highly reinforcing. Unlike other uses of aggression that are hot-blooded, impulsive, and uncontrolled reactions to anger or frustration—also known as “reactive aggression”—proactive aggression is cold-blooded, calculating, and targeted precisely toward those who threaten the perpetrators’ dominance. Proactive aggression is goal oriented, and the goal is to obtain or defend status.

Bullying is the best-known expression of proactive aggression. One bully in the PBS documentary _In the Mix_ explains its function well when he says, “I’ve made fun of people when I am with my friends. I am not going to lie. The reason why I did that is to laugh—to make my group laugh. To put me on a higher pedestal. Even though I don’t do it on a constant basis, it does kind of boost you up a little bit.”

We conducted research involving two hundred tenth graders at an American high school and saw this behavior directly. Every participant in the study received rosters of all grade-mates to help them identify those peers high in status and, separately, those high in aggression. We asked them who hit, pushed, threatened, or physically intimidated their peers; who excluded, ostracized, or conspired to abandon others; and who spread rumors or threatened to end friendships as a form of retaliation. We also asked the adolescents whom they liked most and least among their classmates.

It was not hard for teens to pick out the mean boys and girls. Participants knew exactly who fit each description, and their reports were remarkably consistent. For each peer whom they described as aggressive, we asked our subjects to explain why they thought these individuals acted aggressively—out of frustration (reactive aggression) or to get something they wanted (proactive aggression). A little over a year later, we collected the same information again from the same group of adolescents.

The results from our research, and similar studies in the literature, demonstrated what Jane Goodall learned from watching chimpanzees: acting aggressively was one of the surest ways for teens to increase their status. But this was not true for every form of aggression. Those who were described as reactively aggressive had low status and were also less likable. But proactive uses of aggression had just the opposite effect: although the bullies were disliked, their use of proactive aggression was associated with increases in their status.

Do adults also use aggression to boost their status? Certainly. This type of behavior can take place at the individual level, like bad-mouthing a neighbor to make ourselves seem a little more worthy of attention, or in public, such as when Donald Trump’s poll numbers rose following every insult he lobbed at a reporter or opponent. Sometimes it is even global, as when a nation attacks a weaker foe to assert its dominant position. In each of these cases, the use of aggression is shortsighted, because while it may result in a temporary boost in status and offer a little jolt of social reward, it is not ultimately fulfilling the wishes that really matter.

### POPULARITY PROBLEM #2: 

### Have We Granted Some of Our Peers Too Much Status?

On June 24, 2005, something took place on US television that captured the attention of news outlets all over the world.

It was a typical episode of the _Today_ show, the cheerful morning news program, until host Matt Lauer introduced his next guest. Other than a prior incident involving Oprah, a buoyant couch, and an energetic discussion about his then-fiancée, Tom Cruise was known mostly for being a talented actor with a remarkable string of box-office blockbusters to his credit. But in this interview, Cruise was asked to share his opinions about mental health treatment options. For the latter half of his fifteen-minute interview, Cruise discussed his beliefs and those of the Church of Scientology about postpartum depression, the use of Ritalin to treat symptoms of ADHD, the history of psychiatry, and a fellow celebrity’s choice to seek mental health services when experiencing distress.

Of course, several other items were in the news that same day that might have garnered some attention. Norma McCorvey, the woman dubbed “Roe” in the landmark _Roe v. Wade_ abortion rights case, was testifying before Congress; the Senate was close to approving comprehensive energy legislation; and partisan bickering regarding the United States’ response to 9/11 had reached a fever pitch. But the event that got the most coverage in the media was this interview with Tom Cruise. The story ran for several news cycles all over the world. Articles about it appeared in the _New York Times_ and the _Washington Post_ up to a week later.

Did we all really care what Tom Cruise had to say about such serious issues simply because he has high status?

Several years later, television star Jenny McCarthy began appearing on talk shows to discuss her new book, in which she claimed that a vast medical conspiracy was covering up a link between vaccines and her son’s autism. To be fair, a parent’s coping strategies and search for meaning in the face of a child’s devastating diagnosis is perfectly understandable. McCarthy never claimed to be a scientist and freely admitted that the evidence supporting her beliefs came only from her “mommy instincts.” Just as we cannot blame Tom Cruise for offering his strongly held opinions about postpartum depression, we cannot fault Jenny McCarthy for trying to help parents as earnestly as she knew how.

But the fact that she was a celebrity did have an impact on the power of her opinions. In his book _The Panic Virus_ , Seth Mnookin reports that Jenny McCarthy’s theories on autism “singlehandedly push[ed] vaccine skeptics into the mainstream.” She appeared on television for weeks—not on entertainment programs but on news shows. She sat on panels alongside physicians from the American Academy of Pediatrics, and journalists discussed her ideas as seriously as they did reports on scientific studies and a statement disputing the vaccine theory issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The public not only listened but even changed its opinions. The more McCarthy talked about her distrust of the medical community, the more parents began adopting the same skepticism, eventually making decisions against their own pediatricians’ advice. Mnookin reported that following McCarthy’s televised appearances, the number of parents declining vaccines for their children skyrocketed.

It’s one thing to enjoy watching celebrities when they entertain us. It’s another entirely when our fascination with these high-status figures begins to affect our own behavior, even irrationally.

But even this phenomenon can be explained by the changes that occur in our brains during adolescence. In modern society, celebrities are our highest-status peers—they have all the visibility and prestige we associate with status, based on qualities like attractiveness and excessive wealth. Of course we want to watch them. We care about their lives, their physical appearance, and their courtships and breakups just as intently as we paid attention to the popular teens in high school. Our obsession with status is biologically programmed, and if it seems juvenile to be concerned with such topics, or to consume celebrity-themed media, it is because they remind us of the time in our lives when our unrestrained cravings for social rewards first blossomed.

We are also biologically susceptible to conform to celebrities, simply because of their high status. Marketing executives have long relied on this predilection. The use of celebrities’ images or voices to encourage the sale of goods and services, for fund-raising efforts, and even for endorsements of political candidates has been a standard strategy for decades.

But the leverage of high status to capture our attention and change our behavior can go too far. It might occur when celebrities’ private lives are exposed in greater detail than we would ever want known about ourselves. Even then we continue to watch, effectively signaling the media that such stories will drive viewership. The death of Princess Diana while being pursued by paparazzi is the most notorious example of this. Exploiting high-status figures can also become excessive when celebrities are asked to weigh in on matters outside their expertise, such as during political campaigns or even in congressional hearings. The time may have come for us to stop and question what our exaltation of high status says about us as individuals and as a society.

### POPULARITY PROBLEM #3: 

### Is Our Desire for Status Excessive?

In 2001, political scientist Robert Putnam published _Bowling Alone_ , a book based on his landmark essay that examined social changes in American life over the last four decades of the twentieth century. His research suggested that we are in a period of rapid change, one that seems to involve a shift toward placing an even higher value on status. Putnam found that the public’s conception of a “good life” evolved from a desire to contribute to society to a need for wealth and status. In 1975, 38 percent of respondents indicated that a good life would include “a lot of money”; by 1996, that number had risen to 63 percent. During the same period, the proportion of people who wanted a vacation home, more color TVs, and “really nice clothes” doubled or tripled. Meanwhile, aspirations for a good marriage, children, and feeling connected to others have slightly declined.

Similar results were obtained by Cornell University historian Joan Brumberg. Her research analyzed personal diaries from the past hundred years, examining private thoughts to reveal how desires have changed over the past century. Brumberg reports that young women in the 1890s resolved to take more interest in others and refrain from focusing only on themselves. Their goals were to contribute to society, build character, and develop mutually fulfilling relationships. Yet in diaries from the 1980s, 1990s, and probably today, young women record their intentions to do whatever is necessary to lose weight, find a new hairdo, or buy new clothes, makeup, and accessories—all, presumably, to attract more attention and approval from others.

Fame is in. Power, influence, and prestige are hot. Character, kindness, and community? Not so much.

What has made us so much more status-hungry? The answer involves a wide range of factors.

In 1943, Abraham Maslow proposed a hierarchy of needs, each of which would be fulfilled only after those lower on the list had been satisfied. First, we strive for basic survival requirements, like food, shelter, safety. Next, Maslow argues, we seek love and affection. We then pursue what Maslow called “esteem,” which is effectively equivalent to status—defined as a desire to have others admire and accept us. Does our increased yearning for status today reflect the conditions of an advanced society, where hunger and isolation are increasingly rare? To some extent that may be true. Certainly in some regions of the world, we have become more prosperous and interconnected (at least superficially) than we ever have been. If Maslow is correct, then striving to attain status could be good news, for according to his theory, once we have satisfied the need for “esteem,” we can then advance to the final stage of this needs hierarchy—self-actualization.

Another explanation for our rising need for status is that it simply reflects our increasingly individualistic culture. In _Bowling Alone_ , Putnam extensively discusses Americans’ declining sense of community, which has been replaced by a norm of autonomy and self-reliance. At the turn of the twentieth century, Western society was based far more on cooperation and partnership than it is today. In the field of labor, especially in the industrial era, few tasks could be accomplished without a large assembly of partners working together. In the neighborhoods of the early 1900s, an egalitarian community ensured the safety and comfort of all. While a higher status may have conferred benefits in those contexts, allegiance to and cooperation with a group was nevertheless a necessary part of life.

Contrast this with our work and home lives today. There are far fewer jobs that require a community of workers to cooperate simultaneously to reach a goal. In fact, some of our jobs don’t even require us to be in the same building or time zone. In our domestic lives, many of us don’t know our neighbors. Most of our needs can now be met via a smartphone and an internet connection. In a culture where our sense of community is waning, and mutual reliance is less necessary, has our proclivity to share been supplanted by a desire to have more than others? Does individualism give rise to a craving for high status?

If this is true, we would expect the pursuit of status to be greater in individualistic societies than in collectivistic cultures, which emphasize group harmony more than personal rank. The communitarian worldview is more common in the Far East, and stands in stark contrast to the “me culture” that now characterizes most Western nations.

It’s a difference I couldn’t help but notice on a trip I took from New York to Japan years ago. As I rode the subway to New York’s Kennedy airport, I was surrounded by people who wore their individual differences like a badge of honor. Their clothes, their hairstyles, and their behavior all seemed to shout “Look at me!” The subway from Tokyo’s Narita airport was notably different, however. It was striking to see how similarly everyone dressed and behaved, particularly the adults. In a society that values communal accomplishments over individual ones, attempting to stand out may be not only unnecessary but downright disruptive. A few days later in Nara, the home of the Great Buddha temple, I stopped by a gift shop selling religious souvenirs. Each was customized with a personalized wish, and common choices translated to sentiments like “helping my family” and “contributing to society.” I couldn’t help but wonder what wishes would be top sellers in the United States.

We tested the cross-cultural relevance of status in my own lab by simultaneously examining the two forms of popularity, likability and status, in the United States and China. With graduate students Chris Sheppard and Sophie Choukas-Bradley, I analyzed data gathered from fifteen-year-olds in both countries. The data were collected by our colleague John Abela in two Chinese communities, one in urban Changsha and the other in rural Liuyang, while I gathered it Stateside using identical procedures. Over eight hundred adolescents in both countries were asked to identify the school peers they liked most and least, as well as the ones they thought had highest and lowest status. To our surprise, the concept of status did not translate well. In fact, there is no Mandarin word for “popularity” that has the same meaning among adolescents in Western nations, so we had to use phrases to describe likability and status that were recommended by native Chinese speakers and experts in the Mandarin language.

When we examined what these two samples of adolescents living over seventy-five hundred miles apart told us, our findings suggested that popularity may be at least partially rooted in culture. In the United States, status and likability were very distinct attributes—there was only modest overlap between those teenagers high in one quality and those high in the other. But in China, adolescents who had high status were often also those who were judged to be the most likable. In fact, in the United States, our results revealed that high status was associated with those who were highly aggressive. But in China, we found exactly the opposite—highly aggressive teens were low in status. In a culture that values community, status may not be all that important.

A third possible explanation for our increasing status obsession may be related to the mass media, but not exactly in the way you might think. Among scholars in communication studies, the media is referred to as a “super-peer,” given its commanding role in not just reflecting but establishing our values. It is the peer we read, watch, and heed. The media is not just the vehicle that gives us access to our high-status peers but is a high-status peer itself. Getting attention from this super-peer is a major sign of status and a guarantor of huge social rewards.

According to this theory, our increased desire for status reached a turning point in the 1980s, when the media became a peer that never slept. A society accustomed to interacting with a single daily newspaper and a few dozen radio and television programs suddenly found itself presented with thousands of options to receive content twenty-four hours a day. As the media’s power increased exponentially, it started to use every angle it could to make sure that its audience remained motivated to keep tuning in.

On June 1, 1980, CNN, the first twenty-four-hour news channel, debuted in the United States. Sociologists Joshua Gamson and Denis McQuail observed that this presented a challenge to producers needing to fill airtime, to ensure that viewers would stay engaged as long as possible. McQuail wrote that journalists were required to produce stories that were “supposed to be creative, novel, original, or unexpected [news], yet produced with extreme regularity and often against much more demanding schedules than apply to other industries.” To do so they relied much more heavily on a reporting strategy that had worked in the past—stories reporting the news disguised as stories about people. Theories suggest that this shift in framing had a tremendous effect on our desire for status.

Profiling personal stories is a simple and effective way to add an emotional element to any unfolding event. If we are presented with a story about climate change’s effect on the polar ice caps, we might switch the channel. But if a teaser promises the tale of a family trying desperately to survive flooding in its hometown as a result of global warming, we are more likely to tune in. With the demand for twenty-four-hour content, the focus on “real people” went into overdrive, and soon, we, the public, became characters in the news more than ever before. For a few minutes anyone could be at the center of the media’s focus, the most “visible” person of the hour. What once seemed like a great distance between us and those who were revered as high-status individuals now suddenly seemed like not such an obstacle.

As the gap between us and our higher-ranking peers narrowed, we became even more obsessed with status. The public’s voyeuristic curiosity about the lifestyles of the rich and famous, the proliferation of tabloid “entertainment/news” programming, and the development of reality TV and social media may all be traced to the sudden accessibility of high status for virtually anyone. When we saw our peers achieve social rewards we once thought inconceivable, it became almost impossible to wish for anything else.

Today it seems as though members of the public have morphed from narrative devices used to tell the news to the news itself. We have witnessed the rise of celebrities whose fame seems to be based only on their status, so that what they do, say, and think is now newsworthy in itself. The concept even extends beyond the popularity of people and includes the value we now ascribe to the status of products and businesses in ways that have changed modern marketing and industry. Perhaps it’s time for us to reflect on whether we care a little too much about status, as it is frightening to think where we are headed.

### POPULARITY PROBLEM #4: 

### We Think Status Will Make Us Happy

Today we live in a Warholian world, where we all bid for our brief moment of highly visible status. In the United States alone, over $11 billion a year is spent on plastic surgery. Books about how to earn excessive wealth and prestige regularly appear on bestseller lists. Even in our private lives, in moments when we should be working or connecting with loved ones, we post and tweet, with the not-so-subtle hope that we will garner status. The mid-2010s saw the emergence of consulting firms whose sole purpose is to help individuals increase the number of their social media followers. Will all this time, energy, and expense dedicated to raising our status actually pay off? Will high status actually make us happier?

The answer is no . . . or more accurately, mostly no. I hedge here because the outcome depends on how we approach the question. If we consider the consequences of low status—the fate of those who are widely disregarded, perhaps due to significant deficits in wealth, power, or beauty—then naturally we conclude that it is associated with risk for many types of difficulties in life. It’s not merely that low status serves as a marker for these other determinants of despair. It has been associated with outcomes like depression even when accounting for the effects of socioeconomic stress or cultural disadvantage as predictors in their own right.

But most of us do not seek status as a practical way to make ends meet or to help alleviate personal shortcomings, just as most do not wish to reach only the middle of the bell curve. Rather, we long for high status, which, somewhere deep inside, we continue to believe will make us happy.

But what if that conviction is wrong?

Recent research has documented exactly what it’s like to have high status, and it’s not a pretty picture. In one study, psychologists were able to interview over a dozen of the “most popular” peers in our society whose names would be instantly recognizable—a group that included movie stars, CEOs, TV actors, a state governor, music legends, NBA and NHL athletes, journalists, and even a former child celebrity. No matter what their background, those with the highest status in our society all tell a very similar story, one that plays out in a series of stages.

Stage 1: Elation. _The attainment of high status is accompanied by a whirlwind of attention and adoration._

“The first thing that happens is that everything and everybody around you changes . . . And you can feel it filter down to whatever your inner circle of friends is,” explained one subject. The attention also comes with perks: “The access is unbelievable.” “Suddenly, you’re worth something. You’re important.” “When you reach a stage financially when you don’t need freebies, that’s when freebies are thrown to you.”

The experience is variously described as a “guilty pleasure,” a “high,” and a “rush.”

Stage 2: Overwhelmed. _Most people find their sudden rise in popularity becomes almost too much to deal with._

As another subject warned, “Fame 101 is needed to teach people what’s coming: the swell of people, the requests, the letters, the emails, the greetings on the street, the people in cars, the honking of the horns, the screaming of your name. A whole world comes to you that you have no idea is there. It just comes from nowhere. And it starts to build and build like a small tornado, and it’s coming at you, and coming at you, and by the time it gets to you, it’s huge and can sweep you off your feet and take you away.” Not surprisingly, this quickly leads to . . .

Stage 3: Resentment. _The attention becomes irritating._

“You are an animal in a cage,” the movie star said. “If you’re sitting at a sporting event in a seat and you’re on the aisle . . . all of a sudden you have someone on your left arm kneeling in the aisle [wanting to talk to you]. I want to push them down the stairs.”

Stage 4: Addiction. _The ambivalence regarding popularity becomes almost too much to bear._

If you’ve ever watched _E! True Hollywood Story_ , you’ll recognize this stage as the moral of each episode.

“I’ve been addicted to almost every substance known to man at one point or another, and the most addicting of them all is fame,” said one celebrity. As is true of any addiction, a number of people become dependent on their next hit, hating themselves for wanting it but desperate to have it anyway. Some high-status individuals never get beyond this phase, and their lives become an endless chase for an ever-greater high. If it eludes them, they become the junkies who will do almost anything simply to get even one last taste of the notoriety that they so desperately crave. The cycle can become debilitating, because unlike other addictions, it inherently requires the participation of others to satisfy the craving for status.

Stage 5: Splitting. _The high-status individual realizes that his popularity is not based on his or her actual character at all._

“You find out there are millions of people who like you for what you do. They couldn’t care less who you are,” acknowledges one well-known figure, while another says, “It’s not really me . . . it’s this working part of me, or the celebrity part of me . . . So, I am a toy in a shop window.”

Some report that they are forced to form split personas to retain any real sense of a genuine self-concept—a version of themselves that is for the public, and a version they can maintain with family and friends, while their true self remains somewhere trapped in between. Over time it becomes harder and harder for them to even remember which is real. One subject reports he has “two different dialogues—the one that I’m thinking and the one I’m saying . . . [I can’t be] as authentic as I’d like to be . . . to show my true self.”

Stage 6: Loneliness and Depression. _At this stage, there is no one who really knows the high-status individual at all._

As one respondent explains, “I’ve lost friends . . . just by all this adoration that comes whenever you’re in public, [my friends] feel less. They feel inferior . . . You’re special and they aren’t. You’re extraordinary and they’re ordinary . . . and the next thing you know, they’d really rather not have anything to do with you. And you understand them. You have to.”

Philip Burguières, CEO, president, and director of at least a dozen large, international energy conglomerates over the years, spoke about this isolation often. “I estimate that 50 percent of CEOs, at some point in their lives, experience depression. I receive calls about it daily, and at least twice a week I meet CEOs who are struggling or have struggled with depression,” he said. Rock star Dan Reynolds of the band Imagine Dragons has described his rise in status in similar terms: “[I’ve been] depressed as hell . . . It’s lonely when your life changes like this . . . I’ve lost all my friends . . . the relationships feel false.” Olympic swimmer Ian Thorpe recalls how “The cancer of attention [contributed to my depression]. People sometimes don’t think you have a right to feel like this because you’ve been famous or successful.”

Stage 7: Wishing for Something Else. _Celebrities have everything that many other people wish for, but lack the one thing they desire most._

“[Popularity] is an intrinsically untrustworthy dance partner—it could leave you at any time . . . so it’s a very mysterious thing,” explains one. “Anyone who comes through that dance partner to you is also mysterious. Why? Why do they want me? Why are they interested in me? . . . You start double-guessing yourself. I find I put up a kind of a wall around me, and I just deal with people up to that wall but not inside of it.”

One cried while explaining, “I worry about my son, because I don’t want him to think of me, because I’m famous, as being any more special than he is. And I wonder sometimes if he’s going to confuse fame with worthiness or value as a person, that if he doesn’t grow up to be someone who has celebrity or fame, he is somehow not recognized or not worthy of people’s respect or admiration. I think a lot of people confuse it. In our whole culture, people confuse it.”

In response, these high-status individuals decide to invest in something that feels authentic. For some, it’s humanitarian work or charity; for others, it’s stumping for a cause. But for many with high status, it’s genuine human connection that they long for more than anything else. Relationships with people who care about them for who they are, accept them, and want to spend time with them. It’s awfully ironic: while the rest of the world is wishing for status, those who have it are wishing for likability—the type of popularity that is so much easier to achieve.

—

How about those kids with whom we grew up who were “most popular”? They didn’t all end up becoming sports heroes or celebrities, or in high political positions. How did they turn out? Recent scientific data has addressed this question as well. Joe Allen and his colleagues at the University of Virginia sought to track down the “cool” kids from one of their high school samples to see whether having elevated status led to long-term benefits or problems. Allen’s study had begun with a group of youth who were just about to enter high school. They were thirteen years old—pubescent, naive, and in the throes of the usual adolescent awkwardness. Some had high status, but most did not. Using a variety of measures, Allen determined which were most popular and also which seemed to care most about having high status.

As anyone who has attended high school might expect, these high-status adolescents were among the first in their grade to get involved romantically with others; the first to show signs of minor deviancy, like shoplifting or sneaking into a movie without paying; and the most likely to have physically attractive friends. These are the qualities that many adolescents consider to be “cool,” and sure enough, it was these kids who were named as “most popular” by their schoolmates. Allen and his colleagues labeled this group the “pseudo-mature” teens.

Ten years later, Allen and his team tracked down all the participants in the initial study to see how the pseudo-mature teens had matured compared to their peers. By now the subjects were in their twenties and dispersed far from their hometown of Charlottesville. Allen’s lab flew around the country to meet with each participant, interview his or her friends and romantic partners, collect public records concerning them, and even gain permission to follow each participant’s social media profiles as another source of data. The result was one of the most comprehensive studies ever to examine relationship development from early adolescence to young adulthood.

What they discovered was that the pseudo-mature participants who seemed to have it all at thirteen were no longer doing as well. In fact, they seemed to be experiencing many more difficulties than their formerly low-status peers.

Allen found that by their twenties, the high-status kids were significantly more likely to abuse alcohol and marijuana, and to have higher likelihoods of serious substance-related problems, like DUIs and drug-related arrests. Even after considering their socioeconomic status and adolescent use of alcohol and marijuana as possible predictors, it was their focus on high status as teens that was significantly related to these adult outcomes.

Having high status at age thirteen also predicted poorer-quality friendships later in life. Allen asked each participant in his young adult study to bring a close friend to the research lab. These friends were able to tell the researchers a great deal about the subjects’ lives. Results indicated that those with high status at age thirteen had a more difficult time making friends in adulthood, and those friends they did have said they didn’t much enjoy that friendship.

High-status teens also were less likely to be involved in satisfying romantic relationships as adults. When those relationships broke up, they were more likely to believe that it was because their partners did not find them to be “popular enough” or “part of the right crowd.” Caring about status at age thirteen seemed to be related to a lifetime of seeking more popularity.

Similar results have been found in longitudinal studies of adults. In their studies on extrinsic goals—the kinds of wishes that focus on being well regarded by others—psychologists Richard Ryan and Tim Kasser found a curious link with life satisfaction and well-being. They studied people’s wishes in countries throughout the world, including North America, Russia, Croatia, Germany, and South Korea. Their findings were remarkably consistent no matter where the research was conducted: those who wish for intrinsic rewards, like those that come from close and caring relationships, personal growth, and helping others, report far greater happiness, vitality, self-esteem, and even physical health. But wishing for extrinsic goals—fame, power, excessive wealth, and beauty—is associated with discontent, anxiety, and depression. When Ryan and Kasser likewise followed their research participants over time, it was those who wished most strongly for status who were the most likely to be faring worse later in their lives.

—

So, what is the point of seeking status in the twenty-first century? We don’t need it for the same reasons we did when our brains first developed. In most contemporary societies, humans can access vital resources like food simply by visiting the local market. And with the advent of computerized dating sites and fruity alcoholic cocktails, finding a willing mating partner also is easier in the modern arena, even for those who are not the “alpha” member of their group.

But our ancient brain wiring has us yearning for status nevertheless, and over time we have created new and sophisticated ways to help satisfy those cravings every day. Society has fostered the illusion that by spending enough time, money, and energy, anyone can attain high status.

But that’s not the kind of popularity that will make us happy. Perhaps it’s time for us to realize that status is no longer worth wishing for.
