## CHAPTER 5

## The Popularity Boomerang

## How We Create the World We Live In

It was early in the morning. The crowd was jittery. Sitting in a large auditorium at Emory University were hundreds of young students on their first day of law school. For most, this was the start to the career of their dreams. Soon a professor would arrive onstage and begin explaining what the next three years of life would entail. In the meantime, the students shifted in their chairs, offered overly animated introductions to those sitting nearby, and imagined their futures as legal titans.

Seated at the back of the large hall were Jeff and Steve, who hadn’t yet met. Steve was tall and sandy-haired, and wore gold wire-rimmed glasses. He had a new leather laptop case with an Emory logo. Jeff wore jeans, a plain brown T-shirt, and a Yankees baseball cap that couldn’t quite contain the thatches of curly red hair escaping out its sides and front. He was about to introduce himself when Steve leaned over to pull a few papers from his briefcase and accidentally dropped them onto Jeff’s shoes.

“Damn it,” Steve mumbled as he reached under Jeff’s seat to retrieve them.

“I got it. No problem!” Jeff said as he handed over the pages. “Hey, I’m Jeff.” He pointed to Steve’s briefcase with the Emory logo and asked, “Did you go here for undergrad?”

“No. Brown,” said Steve, who then turned away to review his papers.

Steve and Jeff didn’t subsequently spend much time together in law school. They would go on to have very different careers and markedly different lives.

Steve had graduated near the top of his class at Brown and had substantial experience as an intern at a law firm in Providence. Through his mother’s professional connections, he had met the governor of Rhode Island on several occasions, drafted briefs for a few high-profile cases, and had a letter of recommendation from a federal judge who predicted his “meteoric rise through the ranks of the legal profession.” Steve was nervous on his first day of class, but confident in his future and focused on his desire to become a judge before he turned forty.

Success did not seem as certain for Jeff. He had decided to apply to law school only a few months before he graduated from the University at Albany, SUNY. He was more interested in soccer than his classes while at school, and despite his high intelligence, he did not have the grades to make him an obvious lock for top law schools. Yet throughout college he had received many invitations to join his professors’ research labs or intern at their legal practices, offers he usually declined. It was one of those professors who had ultimately convinced Jeff that he should apply to law school. “Your energy would work well in a firm,” the professor told him. “At the large firms, being an attorney is about relationships as much as it is about the law. You’ll be happy there.” But as Jeff sat in the auditorium on that first day, he asked himself, _What am I doing here? Do I even want to_ be _a lawyer?_

Steve remained focused throughout his entire law school career. He studied, he clerked, and he built his résumé. For his part, Jeff always seemed to be off socializing with classmates—grabbing coffee, going out on dates, chatting in the hallways. One afternoon in their first year, Steve looked out the library window and saw Jeff laughing with a group of classmates. He returned to his studies, proud of how disciplined he had been to reach this point in his career.

Today, almost two decades later, Jeff is doing far better than even he ever expected. A senior partner at a well-regarded firm in Atlanta, he is the first to arrive at the office every morning, not because he has to be but because he can’t wait to see his colleagues and do the work he loves. He’s an outstanding attorney.

Things did not work out as well for Steve. Despite a terrific start in law school, over time he gradually lost his confidence and ultimately his interest in the field. He started as an associate at a mid-level firm back in Rhode Island where he’d previously worked as an intern. But he was in over his head, and after a couple of years of middling performance, he and a colleague decided to start their own practice. After a year without much success, he left. He picked up a few cases here and there, but eventually he grew annoyed. He currently works from home doing part-time consulting for a local real estate agency and is quite unhappy about how his career turned out.

Steve’s and Jeff’s unexpected professional outcomes are just the kind of thing that drives college admissions committees crazy. Who will be the surest bet to succeed? On the first day of law school, Steve was clearly the more qualified, focused, and confident student, with a trajectory that predicted success. Jeff’s path was far less clear, and few would have forecast that his achievements would exceed Steve’s, yet he is by far the more competent attorney and the happier person in his job today.

This same issue faces anyone hiring new employees. Beyond what is on applicants’ résumés, what is the factor that helps distinguish those who will flourish from those who will fail?

After accounting for all of the usual qualities that contribute to well-being and success—intelligence, socioeconomic status, school achievement, physical health, mental health, and so on—there is one factor that has remarkable power to predict life trajectories. It predicts which children thrive. It predicts which employees succeed. It even predicts who enjoys more rewarding romantic relationships and better physical health. It was the one factor that Jeff had but Steve did not.

That factor is likability—not status, but likability. But perhaps more interesting is _how_ likability affects us.

“I think it’s favoritism!” one parent chastised me before I began a talk at a local high school about my research on the power of likability. “Some people just get all the breaks—life is handed to them on a silver platter.”

“People are biased,” a friend who works in a large accounting firm insisted. “Everyone loves going to happy hour with Terri at my office, so when they are asked who is good at their job, they all say her. Meanwhile, the rest of us work our butts off, and no one notices.”

“It’s a con job” is another argument I’ve heard. “If a guy is really smooth, friends with everyone, making them all laugh, then he is probably up to something. It’s a fake.”

As it happens, they’re all wrong.

Likable people are not just _perceived_ to be better at their jobs, more satisfied, happier, and more fulfilled. They actually _are_ all those things. The reason is that likable people live in a different world from the one inhabited by their unlikable peers. It is a world of their own making, and it produces a chain reaction of experiences that molds their lives in dramatic ways.

It’s a world worth understanding, because following the example of likable people might just change our lives.

—

Psychologists have been investigating the power of likability for decades. A host of studies began when researchers first found that some children were consistently nominated by their peers as classmates who were “liked the most,” far more often than they were picked as someone that classmates “liked the least.” These are the Accepted children discussed in Chapter 2. But the power of likability is not only evident among children—Accepteds can be identified at any age. Peer relationship dynamics are remarkably similar across the life span, from four-year-olds in preschool to senior citizens in retirement communities. Accepteds also can be found in any context—the classroom, the office, the softball team, places of worship, the PTA. All include some people who seem effortlessly, immensely likable.

Findings regarding the long-term benefits enjoyed by Accepted people are abundant in the psychological literature. In 1987, developmental psychologists Jeff Parker and Steve Asher summarized dozens of research studies in their now-seminal review of the long-term effects of likability. Their results revealed that compared to the Rejecteds, Accepted children grew up far less likely to drop out of school, commit crimes, or experience mental illness as adults. In another study, Penn State psychologist Scott Gest and his colleagues asked 205 children in grades three through six to report on one another’s likability. Then, ten years later, Gest asked all of the participants to report on how their lives were going. The children initially picked as most likable by their peers grew up to be most likely to be employed and to have gotten promotions. The likable kids also had better odds of being in long-term, satisfying friendships and romantic partnerships. Such findings seem to be universal—similar results were obtained in a seven-year study of youth in Shanghai, China.

But studies like these often provide more questions than answers. The one I hear most frequently is: Does any of this research _prove_ that likability itself leads to positive outcomes? How do we know that the same factors that make people likable aren’t the _real_ reasons they are also happy and successful?

In fact, research does tell us that there is indeed a specific set of traits that almost guarantees that an individual will be very well liked. It’s a fairly obvious list, and it is generally similar for adults and children.

The most likable people are those who cooperate with others, are helpful, share, and follow the rules.

Likable people are generally well adjusted.

They are smart (but not too smart!).

They are often in a good mood.

They can hold up their end of a conversation.

But they make sure to give others a turn to speak, too.

They are creative, especially at solving awkward social dilemmas.

And perhaps most important: they don’t disrupt the group.

Are these the behaviors that are actually responsible for making people happy and successful? Or is there something about being likable—about being popular—that improves our lives directly?

From a scientific perspective, the ideal solution to these questions would be to conduct a randomized clinical trial—in other words, to manipulate a classroom so that one random group of kids became Accepted while others were Rejected. After some period of time, investigators would be able to see how members of each group turned out. You’d have to tell the students, “Remember, these are the kids you really like, so make sure you treat them well. These other kids you don’t like so much. Make sure you are not as excited to be with them for the next few years!” Fortunately, researchers are bound by a code of ethics that prohibits them from experimenting with people’s lives this way.

But back in 1968, a third-grade schoolteacher named Jane Elliot did attempt something comparable with her classroom in Iowa shortly after Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated. Her famous “brown eyes, blue eyes” demonstration was designed to teach children about discrimination, and it lasted only a few days. On the first day, she randomly selected children with brown eyes to be “superior” to those whose eyes were blue. She instructed the brown-eyed group not to sit with blue-eyed children or play with them, and she pointed out their foibles. Meanwhile, she offered extra attention and praise to the students with brown eyes, and instructed them to play enthusiastically with one another. It should be noted that her demonstration was intended to illustrate the effects of prejudice, not likability, and Ms. Elliot herself purposefully contributed to the disparity between brown- and blued-eyed children to demonstrate the widespread assumptions of inferiority that are leveled at minority groups.

Nevertheless, it’s interesting that after only one day of being more liked by their peers, the brown-eyed children began acting more confidently and doing better in schoolwork. The blue-eyed children, meanwhile, became timid, glum, and isolated. They were even less likely to correctly answer quiz items as frequently as they had just the day before. When Ms. Elliot reversed the conditions of her experiment the following day—the blue-eyed children were now deemed superior to those with brown eyes—she found the same results.

Could the effect of likability have similar effects over a lifetime? Is likability really related to our long-term happiness and success? Or is there some other variable that accounts for both?

Absent the use of a randomized clinical trial to study the consequences of likability, researchers have relied on longitudinal research—studies that observe people, sometimes over years or decades—to examine how experiences early in life may predict outcomes much later. Longitudinal research makes it possible to analyze all types of possible predictors of later happiness and success, and then determine which of these factors are relevant to predict life outcomes. It’s also a useful approach to verify whether it is likability that predicts life outcomes or some other factor—a “third variable”—that may be responsible for both.

These third variables are important to consider. Have you read that scientists found a strong link between increases in ice-cream sales and the growth in murder rates? Although it would be tempting to assume that one causes the other—perhaps the sugar high from ice cream sends people running from Baskin-Robbins in a homicidal rage—the link can actually be explained by a completely separate “third” variable: hot weather.

Is the apparent link between likability and later success also due to a third variable? It doesn’t seem so. Study after study has revealed that even after accounting for the effects of IQ, socioeconomic status, mental health, or any of the behaviors that make us likable, there is something about being Accepted that directly predicts how happy, fulfilled, and even successful we are years later.

One study examined more than ten thousand Swedish youth and then followed them over the next thirty to forty years. The children’s likability was measured at the age of thirteen along with a host of possible factors that could explain both their likability and later outcomes. Researchers measured each subject’s IQ, aggressive and disruptive behavior, history of physical and mental illness, parents’ level of education and income, and even the child’s future goals. After accounting for all of these possible influences on adult outcomes, it was likability that predicted happiness, employment, and income decades later. In fact, compared to those who were well liked as kids, those who were rejected were two to five times more likely to be unemployed or request welfare assistance. Likable children even grew up less prone than others to be diagnosed with diabetes, obesity, high cholesterol, or high blood pressure.

Studies also have looked at the value of likability by examining how it might predict _changes_ in our lives. This approach offers another way to determine whether likability might have a causal effect. After all, Accepted children might grow up to seem happier than others because they were happy in the first place, while Rejected children might seem as though they became depressed adults because they were depressed to begin with. In fact, their sad demeanor may have been one of the factors that led to their being rejected.

In my own research, as well as that of many other psychologists, this possibility also has been tested. For instance, in one study of adolescents conducted in my own lab with then-postdoctoral fellow Julie Wargo Aikins, we collected information from over 150 tenth-grade students to measure likability and depressive symptoms. After all the students in the study picked who in their class was liked most and least, we asked each participant to identify any symptoms of depression they might have via a standard checklist used by clinicians. About eighteen months later, we gathered data from the same group again. Our results revealed that some adolescents already had signs of depression during our initial survey. By the time they were about to graduate high school, however, many more participants reported depressive symptoms, and it was the Rejected tenth graders who were significantly more likely to fall into that category. Conversely, being likable predicted improvements in mood over the same period, even among teens who were happy when we first saw them.

What is it about likability, then, that has such a powerful and enduring effect on us?

—

It’s a sunny day on the campus of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. As I stand by the “pit,” a gathering spot right next to the student union, I see about two hundred students walking toward me, all wearing identical hot pink T-shirts. People stare at them and take pictures with their phones as the mob reaches me and then stops.

I am wearing the same pink T-shirt. The students are all enrolled in my course on popularity, and we are taking part in an annual experiment designed to help us understand the reciprocal exchange of “transactions” that continually occur between ourselves and our environment. Our experiment does not concern popularity per se, but it is a demonstration of what psychologists call the “transactional model”—the chain reaction involving how others act toward us, how we behave in response, and how those responses in turn elicit new behaviors among others all day, every day, for our entire life. The transactional model refers to a give-and-take between what we put out into the world and how everyone else responds to it. My experiment was intended to demonstrate how our lives can change with even one simple adjustment to this dynamic.

For the first day of the experiment, the control day, students are asked to wear their normal clothing while they keep a written record of their social interactions and their mood. Every hour or so, they jot down whether they initiated any conversations with others, whether they met anyone new, and how they felt at the time—happy, bored, sad, anxious, et cetera.

Then, on day two, we make a minor adjustment—all my students and I don the same T-shirts. Each year we create a design together to attract maximum attention. Sometimes the shirt has been neon green. In other years, it’s bright orange or hot pink. On the front is a message that’s a little cheeky, sometimes an in-joke for the class. One year it read, “Everyone at UNC Likes Me!” and another, “Most Popular.” But the T-shirt is not really designed to make us likable. The primary objective is to guarantee an atypical social experience for a single day—to trigger novel transactions. When a few hundred people are walking across campus wearing the same eye-catching attire, we are all guaranteed unusual treatment. People stare, chuckle, or even roll their eyes, and many approach us to ask what the T-shirt means.

What we want to know is how this new treatment changes our own behavior, and maybe even influences how we feel. Again, students are asked to record their own behavior and mood, hour by hour. They then review their data and write a paper about their findings. I ask them to discuss not only the two-day experience, but to hypothesize what their lives would be like if they figuratively wore that distinctive shirt every day.

Students invariably write that they are shocked by how much their own behavior changed on T-shirt day. They are even more surprised to see how those changes created a cascade effect—their behaviors caused others to respond in unexpected ways, which prompted their own uncommon reactions, and so on, in an endless feedback loop. Shy students, for example, approached people they had hoped to talk to for weeks. During these conversations they felt more confident, happy, and optimistic. They were surprised to discover that their peers laughed at their jokes, seemed interested in what they had to say, and even invited them to hang out again.

Angry students, who didn’t usually feel very connected with others on campus, couldn’t believe how often they smiled on the day they wore the T-shirt. To their surprise, others smiled back, and suddenly they didn’t feel as angry or lonely. Some reported that it was the first time in weeks that they had chosen to leave their dorms and go out to mingle with others on Franklin Street, Chapel Hill’s famous strip.

Students who typically stared down at their phones as they walked across campus looked up on that day and offered friendly nods to others as they walked by. Their peers nodded back, and my students reported that they felt an increased sense of community, so much so that they were even more likely to raise their hands in other courses. Overall, the consensus of the members of the class each year is that when the world treated them differently, even just for a day, it changed their behavior and their feelings in surprising ways. One student wrote, “If I wore that T-shirt every day in my childhood, so to speak, I would be a different human being now.”

This experiment offers an opportunity to learn how much our own behavior and mood can be affected by altering how we approach the world even for just one day. It also helps explain the power of likability, because being likable changes not only how people treat us, but ultimately how we grow and develop over the course of our own lives. Stated simply, likable people are treated very well. And not just for a single day, but every day.

Of course, this may be true for people of high status as well. Like those who are likable, those with the other type of popularity are the objects of a great deal of positive attention. But that’s where the similarities end. Unlike those high in status, it is those high in likability who have more friends, fuller social calendars, and more genuinely positive interactions.

From the perspective of the transactional model, each of these friendships and social engagements offers another opportunity to practice and learn increasingly sophisticated interpersonal skills. Research demonstrates that likable children indeed develop advanced social skills faster than their peers. Among nine- to ten-year-olds, for instance, likable kids are the first to form emotionally intimate friendships while others are still engaged in juvenile play. When they are a few years older, likable youth are among the first to participate in monogamous romantic partnerships, while their peers are still experimenting with fleeting teen crushes. Of course, developing refined social skills makes these adolescents that much more likable, thus advancing the cycle even further.

The same transactional model explains why being disliked can result in a lifetime of thwarted opportunities and disadvantage. Research reveals that there are many behaviors that lead to being disliked. We can alienate others by acting aggressively, breaking social norms egregiously and unapologetically, acting selfishly, or “oversharing” our own problems in a manner that places self-interest over the needs of the group. But as much as these behaviors can affect a disagreeable person in the moment, it is their impact on other people—the transactions they initiate—that are responsible for the enduring problems experienced by dislikable people.

This can be a difficult concept to accept. It’s easy to blame being rejected on circumstances beyond our control, like our victimization by others or the general unfairness of life. Certainly, that can be true. But the transactional model suggests that some of our happiness and success, or misery and failure, are the direct result of how we’ve conducted ourselves in our daily social interactions.

While likable people live in a world in which they are treated well, unlikable people are avoided, ridiculed, or victimized. In early childhood, Rejecteds are less likely to be invited to playdates and birthday parties, or even to take part in games. Each time this occurs, it represents a missed opportunity to learn new social skills. Of course, lacking social skills only makes them that much more unlikable, perpetuating a sad and damaging cycle. Not surprisingly, by middle school, Rejected children are less adept at following group rules, negotiating conflicts with friends, or knowing how to take turns in large conversations. By adolescence, they are among the last to begin dating and often have limited their friends only to others who were similarly rejected in childhood.

This cycle can start as early as kindergarten. A study by Jennifer Lansford of Duke University examined the transactional model within a group of 585 children who participated in her research between kindergarten and third grade. Over this four-year period, the investigators interviewed participants and their peers a total of twelve times, which offered a chance to study rapid transactions during a critical time in these children’s development. Their research tested the notion that our behavior is not only a product of how others treat us, but also a major influence on our future social success.

Lansford and her colleagues asked peers to report the likability of each child in her study, and teachers were asked to rate each child’s aggressive behavior at school. Her team also interviewed each child to learn about one of their social skills. Specifically, the researchers examined a type of bias that leads some people to see the world as aggressive and hostile in contexts in which most don’t perceive it that way at all. (More on this bias in Chapter 6.)

The results demonstrated just how powerfully likability can affect long-term growth and development. As one might expect, Lansford found that the more children behaved aggressively, or saw the world through “aggression-colored” glasses, the more rejected they were by peers by the next study time point. But importantly, she also found the reverse was true: the more rejected the children were, the more aggressive they became over time. Of course, this in turn led them to become even more alienated from their peers, causing these Rejected children to see the world as even more hostile than they had before. For instance, when shown video scenes that most of their peers thought were benign, those who were rejected became increasingly likely to see acts of cruelty, while those who had been accepted had an increasing tendency to see the same videos more favorably. Naturally, this difference in social skill was related to even greater differences in likability in the following years, and so on.

The transactional model also explains how Jeff became a much more competent and content attorney than Steve. His character was evident even as the two men sat together in the crowded auditorium on the first day of law school. While Steve seemed oblivious to the people around him, Jeff was all introductions, smiles, and handshakes. Standing to reach the rows in front of and behind him, he had brief conversations with many students that day.

“You’re from Chicago?” he asked one. “My uncle lives there!”

“I play soccer, too!” he said to another. “We have to find a league around here!”

Jeff has always been naturally helpful, happy, and kind. He is one of those individuals who can say almost anything to anyone, no matter how difficult or potentially painful, and do so with a genuine grin, some charm, and a self-effacing chuckle. Merely being with him makes a person feel as if they are among the most likable, interesting people in the room.

Because he was so well liked in law school, Jeff was invited to join many study groups, where he encountered a wide variety of perspectives. His likability also led professors to initiate discussions with him outside class, which is how Jeff learned more details about course material than had been presented in lectures. With this additional knowledge, he felt more confident to speak up, which elicited even more opportunities to study with other students, meet with faculty, and so on. Within a year, he was selected as the student representative to faculty meetings, and later became a representative to a national conference of attorneys. All these interactions had a major impact on how Jeff experienced law school. His initial likability as a student started the cycle that led to his success and happiness many years later.

Steve also was enrolled at Emory but didn’t seem to be attending the same law school at all. The academic world he occupied did not involve study groups, meetings with faculty, or leadership positions. When he was asked by classmates for his input, he was evasive and cold, fearing that their success might come at the expense of his own. Students felt tense around Steve and before long just avoided him altogether. When he disagreed with something in class, his hand launched up like a missile, and his comments were more focused on demonstrating his own knowledge than recognizing valid points made by his peers. When assigned to a group project, Steve asserted his ideas without regard to how he might have disrupted an emerging consensus. Ultimately, with decreasing opportunities to study with others, his first-year grades were lower than he expected, and his confidence was shaken. This contributed to a cycle of decreasing engagement in school, further drops in performance, and so on. Steve’s dislikable nature made law school a lonely place without many opportunities to learn, which ultimately affected the lawyer he became.

—

The Steves of the world might find this chapter depressing. It may seem to offer confirmation of their belief that the deck was stacked against them, starting with those first awkward social encounters as children. Now, after a lifetime of negative transactions and lost social opportunities, the challenge to behave more likably may seem insurmountable.

That’s not quite right. The transactional model may tell the story of how Steve reached his unhappy outcome, but it also suggests a path toward change that can be easy to follow.

It may offer some comfort to know that being disliked in the past will affect us only insomuch as we allow it to dictate how we behave today. Even the smallest adjustments in our current behavior can change our future—a friendly overture to a passerby, a single act of kindness, or even something as simple as a smile. It may seem trite, but there’s now compelling evidence to suggest that transactions occur at a level that is beyond our conscious awareness. Without us even realizing it, we are tuned into even the smallest of social cues and being influenced by others’ likability all day long.

—

Imagine walking into a research lab to take part in a psychology experiment. You meet someone in the waiting room about your age who is there to participate in the same study. You try to strike up a conversation, but she barely makes eye contact. She grudgingly answers your questions, but her arms are folded across her chest, and she seems unemotional, sour, flat. After a while one of the researchers comes in and tells you it’s your turn to begin. You are accompanied to the lab and are asked to discuss your own feelings and interests as the experimenter evaluates you.

Now imagine the same experiment, except this time the person you meet in the waiting room looks you in the eye, smiles, speaks easily, and answers all your questions in a friendly manner. The content of your conversation is not any different, but she now projects confidence and enthusiasm—she is, in short, likable. After a few minutes you are summoned to the lab, where you are evaluated by a researcher just as described above.

It turns out you’ve been tricked—the person you met in the waiting room isn’t a fellow participant in the study but is an experimental “confederate,” instructed how to act by one of the researchers. The ruse is designed to covertly test how a social interaction with a person, likable or unlikable, affected you. Depending on which version of the experiment you took part in—the one with the confederate being likable or with her being dislikable—your own behavior, your mood, and even your interests will have been affected.

How could a mundane encounter with a total stranger have such a striking effect? It is the result of a phenomenon known as “social mimicry,” which is the tendency to instantaneously copy others without meaning to or even being aware that we’re doing so.

Social mimicry has subtle yet pervasive effects on us. Studies like the one above have demonstrated that if you were placed with the confederate who kept her arms folded, you would be significantly more likely to fold your arms yourself. If she frowned, you would likely do so as well. The same is true for the speed and tone of your speech. Neuroscientists have found that such inadvertent mimicry is likely due to significant overlap in the parts of our brains that are involved in perception and physical action. This explains why mimicry also occurs after simply asking people to _think about_ how others behave. In one experiment, participants who were asked to imagine elderly people even walked more slowly afterward.

Perhaps most interesting, social mimicry can also unconsciously affect our emotions, which helps explain why we prefer to spend time with likable people and avoid those who are awkward, mean, or sad. We’ve all had the experience of meeting a negative mood magnet—someone who radiates despair and pessimism wherever he or she goes. Even after they depart, we find ourselves feeling down, too, maybe wondering why we’re in a bad mood. Scientific studies have confirmed this phenomenon as well. After just a few moments interacting with sad, socially awkward confederates in experiments, participants commonly report feeling the same way themselves. Their shift in attitude is not simply a matter of having sympathy for the confederate, either. In one study an experimenter read a boring text in a sad manner, and that was sufficient to make participants feel sadder as well.

The effect occurs even when we are trying our best to be upbeat and friendly. At a speed-dating event in Belgium, experimenters asked participants to rate their own mood and their interest in being matched up after each of ten rapid (four-minute) dates. Findings revealed that after dates with an awkward, sad individual, participants themselves reported a decrease in their own happiness and energy, as well as far less interest in meeting for a second date.

Results like these suggest that for gloomy, unlikable people, the world itself is truly quite dreary. Every interaction they have is a bit sadder than it has to be, without them realizing how their own behavior affected others’ moods and made it more likely they would be rejected again in turn.

Meanwhile, happy, likable people seem to be perpetually surrounded by positivity, cheerfulness, and acceptance. Their upbeat nature is so infectious that we feel they bring out the best in us, and we seek out opportunities to be in their presence—all the while unaware that their mysterious “positive energy” is simply the work of social mimicry. Even their laughter is contagious, which accounts for why TV shows have laugh tracks. Hearing others laugh makes us more likely to do so.

Can we use social mimicry to trigger a new pattern of transactions, perhaps even promoting a new chain reaction in our lives? It’s hard to say, as there hasn’t been much research examining the longer-term effects of mimicry. So I decided to try an unofficial experiment of my own.

As I sat at my computer drafting this chapter, my internet service was interrupted, and I ultimately realized I would have to call my service provider for help. As anyone who has reached a technical support line can guess, I spent the next several hours first navigating the touch-tone purgatory of automated menus and then ultimately arriving at my own personal hell—an endless series of customer service agents prepared to walk me through all of the obvious steps I already had attempted to fix the problem. Needless to say, by the time the first hour had elapsed, I was not behaving in an especially likable manner.

I wondered what would happen if I attempted to change the terms of the transaction. Over the next hour, as I spoke with at least another half-dozen technical support agents, I decided to systematically vary my behavior. With some agents, I acted like a Rejected: I was aggressive, impatient, and even oppositional. I’m quite certain those agents did not like me very much. With others, however, I responded like an Accepted: I was upbeat, helpful, and even took an interest in those with whom I spoke. They, in turn, took an interest in me.

Of course as one might predict, the more likably I behaved, the kinder the agent was in return. When I was more socially aversive, however, the agent was equally curt. My behavior didn’t only affect how each agent acted toward me but also the quality of his support. In each instance when I acted in a dislikable manner, agents listened less intently and were more error-prone. When the agents liked me, I received more helpful suggestions.

But there were also some results I did not expect. Being likable didn’t only affect the behavior of the agents I spoke with; ultimately, the transactions had a surprising impact on me as well. As I inquired and learned about the foreign on-call center, I became genuinely interested in my agents’ lives, felt more optimistic about a potential solution, and my patience with the process increased. This naturally promoted greater investment in seeking a solution from the agents, and the whole experience was suddenly far more tolerable.

When acting in a dislikable manner, however, I could feel my blood pressure rise and I even became annoyed with unrelated tasks I attempted while on the phone. I likely missed the chance to learn how to troubleshoot the problem myself, and I suspect it would have taken much longer for my service to be restored.

Being likable didn’t just change how others felt about me, it changed my happiness and success as well. Once I noticed this, it was amazing to witness how easily I could affect so many outcomes—at work or home, among strangers or friends—simply by acting in the ways that make people likable. In each instance, the snowball effects were remarkable. Every compliment bolstered my mood and confidence in successive interactions, and the cycle could last for hours or days.

In our daily lives we are involved in a constant, complex series of transactions that involve rapid social give-and-take. We offer something to the world around us—a social behavior, an attitude, a desire for connection—and the world usually offers something back in kind. It’s an ongoing exchange that happens so quickly, and seems so automatic, that we often don’t even realize it’s happening. We simply think of it as life, rarely realizing how we have been contributing to its direction the entire time.

—

Sometimes acting likably is not so easy, however. That’s because sometimes we don’t realize how much our behavior turns others off, and we never understand how we ultimately contributed to a self-fulfilling fate brought about by our desire to be popular.

Pam is a successful immunologist in her mid-thirties who has a vibrant social life and an upbeat disposition. Her calendar is fully booked with creative outings and activities. She is funny, attractive, and highly accomplished. She also has many friends and always seems to be hosting them at offbeat parties, like costume-themed get-togethers and whodunit murder-mystery dinners.

But despite her busy social life, Pam is lonely and often unhappy. She would love to get married and have a family someday, but she doesn’t think she has met the right man yet. That may well be the case, but it also might be a function of the fact that Pam is a generally likable person who occasionally engages in unlikable behavior. It doesn’t affect her in every relationship, but it could account for her dissatisfaction with her romantic life.

When she meets new men, it’s typically all fun, spontaneity, and affection. She and her dates go to art galleries, concerts, new restaurants. She is charmingly flirtatious, a master at witty banter, and the guys fall for her quickly. Inevitably, though, Pam begins to notice something they do, or neglect to do, that convinces her they might be losing interest. He might show up late for a date or pay more attention to his buddies than to her while at a party. He might stop holding the door open for her as often as he used to. At that point, Pam begins engaging in a type of behavior that is especially powerful in creating a negative transactional pattern.

It starts innocently enough. “Are we OK?” she’ll ask her boyfriend. “I’ve just been noticing that something feels different between us.” Occasionally Pam’s instincts are correct: sometimes the men she dates have lost interest or even feel intimidated by her overt confidence. But more often than not everything is fine, and her boyfriend will affirm that that is the case. It’s here that the problem begins.

Pam doesn’t trust that others will like her as much as she hopes they will, so she simply doesn’t believe their assurances. “I know in my head that he said everything is OK, but I just get scared that maybe it’s not. What if he loses interest?” she explains. This is usually when she asks her boyfriend again for reassurance. Once again, she receives it, but once again she is doubtful, and a self-defeating pattern begins. Sometimes this cycle develops over a period of weeks or months, but it can even arise within the span of a single conversation. In either case, Pam’s previous experiences with rejection cast a shadow over any potential relationship, triggering transactions that become very predictable.

Psychologists refer to this pattern as “excessive reassurance-seeking.” It often takes place in the context of a romantic relationship but can also occur in friendships or even between employee and supervisor. Experts in excessive reassurance-seeking, like Jim Coyne and Thomas Joiner, have proposed that this behavior sets up a self-fulfilling prophecy of failure. The constant questioning and doubting of a reassurance-seeker can make an individual from whom reassurance is sought feel distrusted, stressed, and ineffective, wondering, “Why can’t I help this person that I care so much about? Why doesn’t he or she believe me?” Eventually, the pressure to continually reassure causes them to withdraw. They become slow to return messages, less convincing in their declarations of love. They become less comforting, and of course, this is exactly what the reassurance-seeker is hypervigilant to detect.

“I knew it! I knew he was pulling away!” is Pam’s typical reaction when her boyfriends dump her. But in her furious righteousness and validation, she doesn’t perceive that this outcome may have been the result of a transactional process that she initiated. It was her own behavior that elicited the rejection, and it is that rejection that makes her feel justified seeking constant reassurance in successive relationships. Each failed romance seems to doom the next one.

Research from my own lab has demonstrated just how powerfully excessive reassurance-seeking can undermine relationships and just how early this transactional pattern starts. In one study, we recruited 520 adolescents and asked them to tell us about their reassurance-seeking behavior. We also asked them to name their very best friend and how they thought that relationship was going. We then approached the friends and asked for their own feelings about the friendships. We followed up with our subjects and their friends twice more annually to see how their relationships evolved. We also measured how much each teen was liked or disliked using peer nominations.

Our results revealed that excessive reassurance-seeking can lead to negative transactions, starting in adolescence, and predicts which teens are disliked. In fact, adolescents who engaged in excessive reassurance-seeking told us that their friends had started to become angry with them for their behavior, even telling them to stop. But the adolescents who sought reassurance just couldn’t understand how this was negatively affecting their relationships. While they still enjoyed their friendships, their friends had a different perspective. Specifically, the more frequently adolescents sought reassurance in the first year of our study, the more often their friends reported in year two that their relationship was troubled. They had less fun when they were together. Many friends had begun to withdraw, and some ended their friendships altogether. Not surprisingly, by the end of our study, excessive reassurance-seekers had grown significantly more depressed than others.

—

Understanding the transactional nature of relationships teaches us that popularity is a reflection of how others regard us, but it is, in some part, also a product of how we treat others. This cyclical give-and-take between our social interactions and others’ reactions doesn’t merely influence our day-to-day experiences. It truly can alter our life course, and it is for this reason that popularity is such a remarkably powerful predictor of so many life outcomes. Beyond all of the factors that we already know to be important predictors of our success, our mood, and even our physical health is one that we didn’t really think mattered much after high school.

When I speak about popularity, I invariably hear from two different groups of people. The first are those who as children fit the standard categories—Accepted, Rejected, Neglected, Controversial, or Average. They tell me, for instance, that they were rejected on the day they started kindergarten, and they have felt that way in every school, relationship, and job ever since. They are convinced they are doomed to be rejected their whole lives.

Individuals in the other group tell me that their childhood popularity was transformed. They used to be liked, or disliked, they explain, but somehow, something changed. The process started with how they interacted with those around them. Now they look back on their childhoods and barely recognize the person they used to be. It is as if their memory stars a character they watch empathically, but one who has long since ceased to exist. This is the group that believes there’s a way to break the pattern of popularity.

They are correct.
