## CHAPTER 6

## Our High School Legacy

## How We Can Conquer the Prom Queen Today

If you’re like most people, then high school may seem like a distant memory. Even if not many years have passed since you attended, it still _feels_ like ancient history. We can’t go back and change how popular we were back then, so what’s the point in even thinking about it now?

But what if I told you that those teenage experiences are still affecting you today? Not through just occasional memories, but thousands of times each day. Arguably, those old confrontations with popularity are the very basis for your adult personality.

Fortunately, even just being aware how this dynamic works can be remarkably powerful in helping to keep the prom queen or locker room bully from affecting your life today.

—

A few weeks ago, I stumbled across my high school yearbook and, against my better judgment, decided to flip through the pages. There I was—tinted glasses, wide-collared shirt, and a wannabe mullet.

Who was that? Was I really the same person today as that boy in the yearbook? I recognized him—he was like a long-lost little brother—but I’ve now lived more years _since_ that photo than I had when it was taken. My tastes have changed, and my hopes and dreams have evolved. I’m not that person anymore, am I?

Many of us feel this sense of distance when we think about ourselves over the course of time. Sometimes it occurs when we see an old photograph that seems like an abandoned version of who we once were. At other times, we may look in the mirror and be surprised to see someone so old staring back at us. It’s amazing how detached we can feel from who we once were or even who we are now.

Of course, that really _was_ me—I am the same person. Or at least, there are plenty of through lines that connect that teenage boy to the man I am now. For instance, the boy in that yearbook was very late to mature—even as a teenager, I was a pip-squeak. Today, I still religiously lift weights, which is probably not a coincidence. And surely my tendency to behave and dress like a young, cool professor is just an evolution of my mouthing off in high school advanced placement classes—both good strategies to avoid seeming like a total nerd.

These are the kind of continuities that are easy to recognize—the traces of our adolescent selves we see in the people we are today. Perhaps you like the same music. Maybe you still have the same core group of friends, or still wear your hair in the same way (thankfully, I do not). These are the superficial vestiges of our past that we feel we can control.

But what if the legacy of our adolescence extends deeper than that? What if it still marks us today in ways we don’t even realize? And what if it is affecting us in ways that undermine our lives?

However alarming that is to imagine, accumulating evidence suggests that this is indeed the case. In fact, who we were as teenagers may influence our lives even more than who we are today.

For instance, in one recent study, a group of economics professors from the Universities of Michigan and Pennsylvania examined earning potential among men. Using large national databases in the United States and Great Britain, they looked at factors that predicted the salaries of over twenty thousand men at age thirty-three. One of the items they considered was each man’s current height and how tall these same men were when they were sixteen years old. Was height related to how much money each subject made?

Yes, it was—tall men earn more money. But perhaps especially surprising was that it wasn’t how tall these men were at their current age that was most closely related to their salary, but rather their height at age sixteen. Something about having reached that height in adolescence had an effect on these men for the rest of their lives. It changed something in them—how they felt about themselves, how they acted, or maybe what experiences they’d had since. Whatever it was, it remained with them for decades.

Studies show that it’s not just our physical appearance in adolescence that marks our adult lives. There are other characteristics that matter, and some probably even more so, because as compared to how we feel about our changing looks, which are obvious to us, there are some things that occur during our teenage years that affect us in ways that we don’t see.

In fact, recent research suggests that the aspect of our teen years that may have one of the most powerful influences on who we are today is that one thing that mattered to us so much back then—our popularity. And popularity didn’t just change us superficially—it altered our brain wiring, and consequently, it has changed what we see, what we think, and how we act.

Luckily, the extent to which we let our teenage experiences dictate our lives today is well within our control. But we must first stop to consider what popularity meant to us when we were young.

In my own suburban hometown on Long Island, as in many hometowns, popularity was strongly linked to money, in the form of fancy houses, jewelry, and the “right” clothes. All the popular kids had Members Only jackets and designer acid-wash jeans. They were the first to get an Atari, and they spent the entire fall talking about their summers at expensive sleepaway camps in upstate New York.

But I was neither wealthy nor cool. I was raised by a single mother who worked as a secretary for a group of accountants. I worked, too, part-time at the local grocery store, and saved my paychecks to buy a Members Only look-alike jacket at a flea market. I even tried to make my own acid-wash jeans with a bottle of Clorox and a fresh pair of pants from Sears. (It didn’t work.)

I tried hard to fit in, and that meant faking it. At lunch, I held my money in a clenched fist so no one could see that I was paying a reduced price. I pretended I’d watched music videos that in reality I never saw because we couldn’t afford MTV.

Overall, when it came to popularity, my anxiety that I was too blue collar to fit in was a feeling that stuck with me. This doubtless accounts for the special kinship I feel with first-generation college students at the university where I teach.

So how does my background affect me today? Have I grown up desperate for wealth and materialistic excess, whether in the form of luxury cars or expensive watches? No, it’s not that simple. Our adolescent hopes play out in our adult lives more imperceptibly and more pervasively. The power of popularity comes from the subtle, almost invisible ways it continues to define us—in what psychologists call our “automatic” reactions.

—

Although we don’t talk much about antiquated psychological concepts like the id, ego, superego, and unconscious anymore, we do know that there are plenty of actions we take without thinking—feelings that seem to bubble up from nowhere and ways that we react to life that just seem to be part of our “personality.” Today, we understand that all of these automatic behaviors, feelings, and thoughts are related to specific activity in our brains. Recent research suggests that, in a very literal sense, our brains were built on a foundation of popularity.

It’s during adolescence—or at the start of puberty, to be more precise—that our brains develop more dramatically than at any other point in our lives after the age of one. As we enter our teens, our brains grow far more new neurons, allowing us to store substantially more information. Adolescence also results in more substantial neural coating with myelin, the fatty substance that makes our brains work faster, enabling more efficient and sophisticated thought. In short, our brains evolve from the way that children think (spontaneously, in the moment, and without self-consciousness) to the way adults do (more ruminative, autobiographical, and attuned to others’ perceptions of us).

The experiences we have in those critical years have the potential to affect the brain we will live with for the rest of our lives, which gives our teenage experiences with popularity such immense power. They are among the first thoughts that seem especially important to us at the very time that our brains are evolving so substantially. It is in these newly maturing brains that popularity moments and encounters will be encoded and that all subsequent experiences will be compared to and built upon.

Did popularity play a big role in how _your_ brain developed? Try testing yourself. What’s easier to remember, the name of your ninth-grade social studies teacher or the prom king and queen in your high school? If you’re like most people (who didn’t major in history), then you probably have far richer memories of the popular kids in your school than anything else in adolescence. You can probably even recall the feelings you had about the cool kids—and maybe even relive some of those feelings all over again as you remember them. It’s not just a matter of nostalgia—it’s as if those teenage experiences seem far more recent than they actually are, and far more salient and impactful today than they should be.

This is no accident, as has been established by recent studies in psychology and neuroscience. Scientists used to think that different parts of our brain were autonomously responsible for what our senses perceived, how we behaved, and each of our emotions. But we now know that this isn’t quite right. Functional MRI scans conducted with adults while they are asked to look, smell, hear, or feel what the researchers present to them tells us that it’s actually a collection of interconnected brain regions that are at play—a neural network. The same thing happens when we experience emotions, solve problems, or make decisions. And findings have revealed that our hippocampus, the part of the brain responsible for so much of our autobiographical memory, is in on the action far more than was ever realized. This means that our past is continually called forth and used as a template for us to evaluate, compare, and respond to what we experience today. In other words, at some level, without our being aware of it, our brains spend all day, every day, drawing upon those initial, formative high school memories.

Adolescent memories can affect us in many powerful ways—specifically by creating biases in what we see, what we think, and what we do. Psychologists refer to these as several of the steps of “social information processing,” which is a complex way of saying that if we were to review any social interaction in our lives in super–slow motion, we would discover that the thousands of reactions involved in it are actually the result of a series of discrete automatic decisions. We don’t experience these as discrete steps, of course, but rather as instinctive behavior, because this all takes place in literally a fraction of a millisecond.

For instance, I recently ran an errand at the grocery store, and as I entered, a large man was hurrying out. As he passed by me, our shoulders bumped, and I was nudged a bit to the side. I instantaneously said, “Oops, sorry.” That was an automatic reaction.

This kind of trivial incident happens so often that we never bother to think about it. But this time I asked myself: why did I apologize? The slight collision wasn’t my fault, so my response seemed a bit foolish. A split second later, I saw another customer being brushed aside by the same man in the same way. His automatic reaction was different, shouting something that isn’t fit to print. Neither one of us planned our responses to getting pushed—they just happened. The millisecond decisions we make in such reactions reveal some form of bias that can be traced back to our past. Individually, each of them may not always have significant consequences. But collectively, they define who we are and how our lives unfold.

Psychological science has now demonstrated exactly how these biases are shaped by our memories—referred to collectively as our “social database.” In many ways, this process can be quite useful. It helps us efficiently scan all of the social information we confront, make decisions about how to respond, and execute satisfactory behaviors that maintain our survival. After all, we can’t stop and seriously reflect on every single social interaction we have in a day. Our sophisticated and efficient adult brains simply rely on whatever has worked for us before. Someone walks by and says hello? Nodding back seemed to be successful previously, so we do so again. Someone bumps into you? Being polite, getting out of the way, and avoiding conflict has always proven to be the path of least resistance, so we’ll go with that.

But remember: these biases are all skewed toward initial formative memories from our adolescence. Our adult brains began to form to help us survive in the hallways of high school. The problem is, we left high school long ago—and our brains never got the memo. This is probably why, every once in a while, something atypical happens, whether a miscommunication, a mental hiccup, or an embarrassing moment. It’s in moments like these when our background biases get thrust to the fore and exposed, and the legacy of our experiences with adolescent popularity makes itself known.

—

Many years ago, I was attempting to hang Sheetrock to create an extra room in my small condo in New Haven. After a few hours, I realized that I have no aptitude for construction work and found myself covered in drywall dust, feeling stressed and exhausted. As it happened, I had just come back from a consulting job, during which I had discovered the joys of all-expenses-paid travel at a luxury hotel and spa, and it struck me that a massage—something I would never previously have considered—sounded like the perfect way to unwind.

I found a place calling itself a “health studio” that offered massages only a few miles away, in a tony Connecticut suburb. I scheduled an appointment and, at four o’clock, pulled into the parking lot of what looked like a high-end strip mall. You can probably see where this is headed, and by now you may be thinking that you would never make the mistake I was about to make. Surely no biases could possibly be so powerful that they would render you oblivious to such clear signals. But on that Friday afternoon, I was mostly concerned about appearing able to navigate fancy massage places and enjoy high-end indulgences. I wanted to fit in by not seeming too blue collar.

After spending some time searching for the place, I was told to walk to the back of the row of shops, where I finally found the entrance. It stood next to a Dumpster under a neon sign—a critical cue, had I been in the proper frame of mind to notice.

I stepped inside, took a look around, and with some confusion asked the receptionist, “Do you take credit cards?”

“No,” she replied, “you need to give us cash. For thirty minutes, it will be forty dollars. And remember to bring your gratuity into the room with you.”

That seemed odd, but again, I was new to the experience. I passed another man in the locker room who was wearing an expensive suit. He seemed extremely happy and had just begun loosening his tie. He looked up and offered me a quick nod. I felt calm again—after all, he seemed well adjusted and wealthy, so of course _he_ would know what he was doing.

Gina, the massage therapist, was young, attractive, and glad to see me. She immediately asked for her tip.

“What? Oh, I’m sorry,” I asked as I raised a ten-dollar bill clenched in my fist. “Did you want this now?”

Gina looked at the money, then looked at me, and then looked back at the bill. Speaking far more bluntly now, she asked, “Uhhh . . . what exactly is it that you want?”

_Oh!_ I finally realized. _Is this one of_ those _kind of places?_ Immediately panicking, I wondered, _How do I get out of here quickly and politely?_ and began looking for an escape route. I lied about having an injured shoulder that needed medical attention and bolted.

No one has ever gotten dressed faster. I was out of the locker room, down the stairs, past the Dumpster, and into my car before I was able to laugh at myself.

I began to take account of what had just happened. How did I miss the neon sign directly in front of me? Why did I think the presence of a well-dressed man automatically signaled a legitimate therapeutic massage, and why did I lie about my shoulder? Each of these automatic reactions revealed my own biases.

My visit to the “health studio” was humiliating, to say the least, and it’s still embarrassing to recall. But this anecdote offers two important lessons. First, and perhaps most important, when booking a massage, be sure to carefully review the list of available spa services before confirming your appointment. Second, we all have substantial biases that have deep roots in popularity. And these biases are responsible for far more of our automatic actions, and our mistakes, than we ever may have considered before.

—

We would all like to think that we are highly skilled observers of the world around us, so it can be unsettling to consider that we may miss signals as obvious as a neon sign directly in front of us. But in fact, we misperceive cues all the time. This is due to the first step of social information processing, referred to as “cue encoding.”

Cue-encoding biases can be remarkably powerful. Consider for a moment the huge amount of complex social information your brain must encode every day. Like a giant filter, it must sift through all the stimuli around you, make sense of them, and then decide what deserves your attention. Consider the few moments it takes to enter your workplace. As you pass dozens of people—in a big city it might be hundreds or thousands—your brain automatically reads each of their facial expressions, postures, fragments of speech, and spatial relationships to you, all to determine what social cues are present and require action. If someone nods at the very edge of your peripheral vision, you respond immediately by nodding back and smiling without even thinking. If someone with a worried expression is gazing past you, you turn and look over your shoulder almost instinctively. But if something no less noteworthy takes place—say, a plane flying overhead—only young children will notice and react. The rest of us know that such an event is rarely relevant to us, so we screen it out. We don’t only ignore it; research reveals that if asked later, we would be quite certain that there had never been a plane at all.

What else are we missing? Or just the opposite: what information may we be overly attuned to? To examine this, a team of British psychologists conducted a study to see just how much cue-encoding biases can change what we observe, and the degree to which popularity is related to those biases. They asked adults to watch eight short movies and pay careful attention to every detail they could. Each movie depicted a typical adolescent school scene, such as teens standing near their lockers, in the cafeteria, or outdoors. Each scene also included a range of social cues. Some suggested that adolescents liked each other, depicted by smiling, nodding, laughing between peers. Other cues included scenes of peers interrupting or ignoring one another, arguing, or using closed body posture—all indicators of rejection. The researchers were interested in learning what the study participants would be most likely to notice, and so had each of the subjects wear a special device over their eyes that measured exactly where their pupils were directed and for how long they remained focused on specific images on the screen.

The results suggested that even when we are asked to watch something quite simple, we don’t take everything in. Our eyes remain focused on small subsets of action that align with our own past social experiences. People in the study with prior histories of social success, for example, remained focused predominantly on the positive interactions in the videos. For 60 percent to 70 percent of the time, their gaze remained fixed on the people who were smiling, nodding, or including one another. They looked at the people engaged in negative social interactions less frequently, and when they did, they maintained their gaze briefly.

In contrast, those with histories of social isolation and loneliness scarcely looked at the positive scenes at all. For about 80 percent of the time, however, their pupils remained fixed on the actions that depicted social exclusion and negativity. It was as if they had watched a completely different movie altogether—focusing far more intently on cues that were barely noticed by others at all.

These findings have been replicated in many studies. When children are asked to watch cartoons that include hostile content, those who have been rejected by their peers take much longer than others to look away. When reading stories about social interactions, those who have had difficulties with popularity are more likely to recall the hostile moments in the narratives, while those who were popular remember the friendly and supportive exchanges between the characters.

We do not see things as they are, we see them as we are.

—Anaïs Nin

Does this mean that unpopular people are at risk for reliving their awkward high school days forever after, screening out all the positive social cues they witness? And are popular men and women always observing the world through “popularity-colored” glasses? To some extent, the answer is yes.

Consider your own biases. When speaking to a group, do you look at the audience members making eye contact and nodding, or the ones staring at their phones and paying no attention to you? When you leave a party, do you recall all of the guests who spoke with you, or the one who didn’t even say hello? Has your current desire for popularity led you to encode only the information that reinforces your happiness, or is it the data that remind you of a thwarted adolescent desire to belong?

Encoding negative social information is not necessarily a bad thing. For instance, imagine taking part in a meeting in which your firm is pitching its services to a potential client. Your teammates are friendly, charismatic, and project a sense of high status, and are all likely to encode social cues indicating that the client likes them. They notice that the client smiles often, nods in agreement, and shakes hands enthusiastically. After such a pitch meeting, research findings suggest that these employees will rate their own performance as outstanding and predict a high likelihood of landing the client.

However, in this situation, previously unpopular individuals might ultimately be more useful. They will be more likely to notice, for instance, if the potential client breaks eye contact or alters body posture whenever the presenter talks about the future. They might be especially attuned to signals indicating which of the firm’s ideas are well received and which are falling flat. When asked later to reflect upon the pitch meeting, those who were less than popular as teenagers will offer a mixed review of how the gathering went. This phenomenon, referred to as “depressive realism,” suggests that vigilance toward negative cues actually can lead to a more objective and clearer view of social information, undistorted by a positive bias. For this reason, some research has shown that previously unpopular people are perceived by others as more empathetic and more sensitive in social situations.

One study asked those high in power, prestige, and influence to draw an uppercase _E_ on their foreheads as fast as they could, so that others would be able to read it. High-status people were far less likely than those low in status to draw the letter in its correct orientation and sketched a mirror image instead, leading the researchers to conclude that those high in status had a poorer ability to consider others’ perspective. Participants high in social status also score more poorly than those low in status on tests of emotional intelligence, empathy, the ability to detect sarcasm, and correctly noticing a variety of emotional expressions.

In another study, researchers used an experimental manipulation to make their participants feel temporarily higher or lower in status and then tested whether there were differences between the groups in social information processing. They presented all participants with photos that only featured people’s eyes while they made a variety of facial expressions. Results suggested that as compared to those who were made to feel high in status, those who were made to feel lower in status were suddenly better at identifying others’ feelings. Even this artificial simulation of low status was sufficient to improve cue encoding. The benefits of unpopularity may even go deeper. Research using fMRI scans has demonstrated that while reading stories about others, those low in social status actually have more activation in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex, and the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex—regions associated with our ability to understand what others think, feel, and want.

—

Our adolescent experiences with popularity affect not just _what_ we see, but also how we _interpret_ these observations. Psychologists call this the “cue interpretation” step to social information processing.

For some, this is a concept hard to fathom. Wouldn’t everyone, when presented with the same information, reach the same logical conclusion about it? Don’t we all interpret data in similar ways?

I decided to test this myself in one of my classes by conducting a quick experiment. Participants were asked to watch a short video and describe what they saw. The video was simple and easy to absorb: at the center of a plain white screen was a box, while three colored circles—one blue, one green, one red—each moved around it. At one point two circles enter the box, and then leave, while the third circle trails behind. At another point, one of the circles bounces against the sides of the box, which then appears to break. As soon as the video ended, the students were asked for a written description of what they had observed.

The simplicity of the video was deliberate, designed to ensure that everyone watching was likely to have encoded the same information. In fact, the participants were shown it twice, so it would have been hard for any of them to have missed any of the objects in it. The task given to the students to write down what they had seen was likewise intentional, as it did not ask them to interpret the video’s cues but rather to merely recount what they had observed. A reasonable response, therefore, would be to describe the action of the piece as three circles moving around a box, with two entering, and so on. But no one depicts it that way. Because cue interpretation is an automatic process, we ascribe meaning and intent even to fictional objects. And our descriptions of the same event can vary substantially.

Here are a few of the more colorful descriptions my students offered. Notice how they all interpret the video differently, ranging from neutral to far more aggressive takes:

**Student 1:** “Red and Green were originally in the lead and Blue followed. Blue was very far behind and was left out of entering the square because the door closed before he got there.”

**Student 2:** “The Blue circle was mad at the other two circles for locking him out, so he broke into the box and was like, ‘Hey, Green, why did you do that to me?!’ Then the Red and Green circles were like ‘whatever’ and they deserted the Blue circle and left him altogether.”

**Student 3:** “OK . . . the Red and Green circles are chilling in the room (I think Red is a female). Blue is angry and feels left out—clearly blames Green circle for excluding it. Blue banged on the door and forced it open. Blue was very mad and was bouncing all over the place. Looks like there is violence. Green faced up to Blue and then left the room with Red and closed the door on Blue.”

**Student 4:** “Blue is a crazed lover, blinded by jealousy, who is furious and anxious. In a violent narcissistic rage, Blue blows down the door of Green (the man in the relationship) and Red, and provoked Green into a fight. Green was not in the mood for fighting because he was happy with Red. Red chilled in the corner, scared of Blue. Green and Blue duked it out and the Green circle, who appears the victor, took Red out of the box.”

What led to such dramatically different interpretations of such simple cues? The answer, again, has everything to do with popularity. These same students had already reported their high school popularity to me using confidential ID numbers earlier in the semester. When I matched their accounts of the video to these data, I discovered that it was the students who were unpopular as teens, like Students 3 and 4, who interpreted the circles as fighting. The formerly popular students, like Student 1, were far more likely to see them as playful.

—

We all have biases in how we interpret social cues. Since we all have unique pasts, these biases are unique to each of us. For instance, some may see a well-dressed man loosening his tie, smiling giddily, and wonder what mischief he is up to and perhaps suspect their surroundings. Others would interpret the same information differently. Admittedly, our cue-interpretation biases don’t typically land us in a den of iniquity, as they did to me, but if they are extreme, and left unchecked, they can affect our lives substantially nevertheless.

Research has revealed a few common themes in cue-interpretation biases that may be especially troublesome, especially when they begin to color the way we interpret the world around us on a regular basis. In long-term studies, these have been shown to be strong predictors of significant relationship problems and even psychological symptoms like depression, anxiety, or addiction years later. Most of us know someone whose behavior reveals these tendencies.

Imagine that you have plans to meet a friend, or maybe a first date, at a coffee shop at 6 p.m. By 6:30, you start to feel awkward sitting alone. You check your phone, but there is no email, text, or voice mail. What’s the problem? You encode all of the available information: the person you planned to meet has not arrived, and you haven’t heard a word. Now it’s time to interpret the data. What’s your gut response? Do you worry that something bad happened? Do you assume the friend is running late, or has forgotten your plans for reasons that have little to do directly with you?

Perhaps. But if you have ever felt slighted and left out, or longed to be more popular at some point in your life, you may begin to wonder—perhaps even assume—you’ve been stood up. Now you feel a little angry. Even if your friend does show up with a reasonable explanation, those feelings may persist. This is a sign of what psychologist Geraldine Downey calls a “rejection sensitivity” bias, a tendency to expect and emotionally react to rejection that creates a cycle of lifelong unpopularity: we wish to be popular, assume we are not, and then in turn yearn for it all the more. Not surprisingly, this type of bias also predicts a host of related negative outcomes throughout our lives, including body dissatisfaction, burnout at work, depression, and loneliness. Adults with high levels of rejection sensitivity are even more likely to contract infectious illnesses and to develop heart disease.

But can’t rejection-sensitive people just _choose_ to make another interpretation? Can’t they just recognize that they are overly pessimistic and start making mental corrections for their self-critical biases? In other words, can’t they just snap out of it?

It’s not quite that easy. Prior social standing and resulting biases may cause changes in brain wiring that take some effort to override. Harvard psychologist Leah Somerville asked subjects to complete a standard measure of rejection sensitivity involving a set of hypothetical social situations in which a number of individuals report that they strongly anticipate they will be hurt or abandoned by others. She then asked her subjects, who were either high or low in rejection sensitivity, to look at pictures of a new set of people and guess whether they would be liked or disliked by each of the individuals anticipating being hurt or abandoned. While they waited to hear the outcome, each participant’s brain activity was measured using an fMRI scanner to reveal neural responses to social evaluation. Somerville’s results are especially interesting because they revealed not how people’s brains activated when they found out whether they were rejected or accepted; rather, the study focused simply on how brains responded when _anticipating_ rejection or acceptance. People low in rejection sensitivity had fairly mild neural responses in a region of the brain that led Somerville to conclude that they didn’t particularly care whether the strangers liked them or not. It did not seem relevant to their view of themselves.

But for the subjects with high rejection sensitivity, neural activity in this same region was quite strong when anticipating acceptance or rejection, suggesting that they placed high value on this type of social judgment. In other words, highly rejection-sensitive individuals feel that social feedback is very important, and it is strongly associated with how they feel about themselves.

A second common interpretation bias may also seem familiar: the tendency to assume that others are being hostile in an emotionally equivocal situation. Remember your tardy friend at the coffee shop? A person with a hostile attribution bias might feel intentionally stood up because their friend was being cruel. This type of bias is common among those who were unpopular adolescents. Psychologists uncover hostile attribution biases in children by asking them to interpret ambiguous stories. For instance, “You lend another child your favorite toy, and when she returns it, it is broken.” Or, “You are sitting at lunch when someone walks behind you holding his drink. The next thing you realize is that there’s milk all over your back.” For each story, children are asked to report what they think happened and why.

After hearing these narratives, most kids report that the events were accidental. But some children, especially those who have been rejected by peers, consistently believe the slights involved were intentional acts of mean children. Experiences with unpopularity actually strengthen this bias over time. Being rejected at the start of the school term predicts who will exhibit hostile attribution bias by the end of the year, even after controlling for who may initially have had this type of bias. This probably occurs because for some children, a hostile attribution bias offers an adaptive way to interpret life experiences. For those who were treated poorly by their peers, it is reasonable to grow up protecting oneself from social unpleasantness. Unfortunately, some children never outgrow this bias, even years after the cruelty of adolescence fades away.

When they mature, children with hostile attribution bias turn into our paranoid neighbors and cynical coworkers, people who are at greater risk for problems at home and work. Mothers with this bias are more likely to assume that people are antagonistic toward their children and to assume that their own children are being purposefully hostile; their children are even more likely to become aggressive themselves. Parents with hostile attribution bias also are more likely to display aggressive behavior toward their romantic partners.

According to research from occupational psychologists, people with hostile attribution bias are more likely to engage in workplace aggression. They arrive late, skip meetings, waste supplies, antagonize coworkers, and bad-mouth the office to others who work elsewhere. When they are interrupted, their advice is ignored, or their contributions go unacknowledged, they are also much more likely than others to become angry or anxious, or even quit.

—

Our adolescent experiences don’t only influence our cue encoding or our cue interpretations. They also influence how we act in the millisecond moments of social information processing. These “response biases” also have a lot to do with popularity. A bias toward wanting to fit in by seeming savvy and sophisticated may lead us to unnecessarily lie to a health studio employee just to save face, for instance.

In one recent study, a team of developmental psychologists showed a series of videos to over four hundred youth and asked each to imagine that they were a person depicted as the victim of bullying. In some videos, they watched peers spill water on a victim; in others, peers either called them names or damaged their toys or got them dirty. After each video, children were asked to discuss how they would respond to such treatment. The subjects discussed the video with the researchers, who were thus able to ensure that the children had encoded and interpreted the scene in the same way. But the results showed that those who were popular chose to behave in ways that would allow them to mend relationships and even build friendships with the bully. In contrast, those who were unpopular were more interested in revenge, in appearing dominant, or in avoiding the situation entirely. In other words, unpopular children’s impulses were to be aggressive, rude, or passive. This, too, is a bias, but not in cue encoding or cue interpretations. It is a bias in how we choose to act in the span of a millisecond.

Related research indicates the same biases affect adults based on whether they used to be popular or not, and these biases are particularly evident when they are feeling very emotional or are intoxicated.

—

We have thousands of social interactions every day. For each event, we encode information from the world around us and interpret it. Finally, if the situation calls for a response, we act. While psychologists understand this reaction as a series of social information processing steps, we experience it in less than a millisecond, without contemplation or deliberation. Those milliseconds combine to fill our days, influence our relationships, define our identities, and ultimately determine our lives—who we are. These automatic reactions can make us seem as if we have terrific instincts or can get us into trouble. And the basis for what we see, how we act, and what we do all day every day is in large part a function of our high school popularity. Those old foundational memories are referenced again and again as our brain helps us get through the day.

If you were popular in high school, and your adult brain initially archived memories of inclusion, acceptance, and admiration, this may all seem like great news. You’ve been endowed with a set of favorable biases that research suggests will contribute to your optimism, self-confidence, and trusting nature today. But be warned: they may also lead you to an unrealistic sense of the world around you and can result in overconfidence and naiveté.

If you were not popular, those old desires to fit in, or those old wounds of rejection, may feel as if they will never heal. Because the power of popularity is strongest when left unchecked and unchallenged, it’s worth the effort to attempt to reduce how much our past affects how we experience the present. While it may seem depressing or fatalistic to discover that our high school experiences are working behind the scenes to make us repeat our adolescence over and over again, it is very important to remember that we don’t have to become victims of our past. We now know that within each of the milliseconds of our social lives, we are presented with opportunities to make new choices. By understanding how our high school popularity affects us now, we are not doomed to be dominated by our past. We are freed to overwrite it! Eventually, we can fill our social databases with new memories to replace the damaging ones.

—

It’s been a while since I browsed the pages of my high school yearbook, but in that time, I’ve done a fair amount of thinking about that period of my life. I recently had a dream that I was at a faculty meeting, but the other professors were all kids from my graduating class, and they weren’t paying attention to what I had to say. I remember that during the dream I felt confused. _Why are they here? I don’t work with any of these people. I’m a grown-up. They’re not even part of my life anymore!_

But maybe they are, in ways I never imagined.
