## CHAPTER 7

## Clicks and Cliques

## What’s Not to “Like”?

It was not long ago—the year 2000 to be exact—that two Silicon Valley engineers, James Hong and Jim Young, had a difference in opinion about the appearance of a woman walking by. Their disagreement may have started as a calm discussion, but it arguably launched a worldwide phenomenon that changed our entire society, perhaps as substantially and pervasively as any other innovation in the twentieth century, including the automobile, the telephone, or the microchip.

It was this conversation that Hong and Young say led to the development of a website they called Hot or Not. You may remember having heard about this site back in the day. You may have even visited it or sent in your photo. It probably didn’t seem paradigmatic at the time, but then you may not remember what the world was like when this site first launched.

In 2000, the web was not too crowded. It was only four years earlier that Google had been conceived in a research lab a few miles away. Hot or Not wasn’t the first website of its kind. But it was that site that hit a nerve and became one of the most popular internet destinations of its time by far. Within just one week, it reached over two million hits per day. A few weeks later, it was ranked by the Nielsen Company as one of the top twenty-five sites worldwide for internet advertising. But perhaps the most significant effect of this site actually had more to do with how it inspired others—and one man in particular. Hot or Not was reportedly an inspiration for Mark Zuckerberg’s own Harvard-based Facemash. And we all know what happened after that.

At its simplest conceptualization, Hot or Not offered a public service for anyone who was insecure about his or her looks. Just minutes after posting their photos, users would receive objective feedback from thousands of people around the world enabling them to learn just how they were perceived by others.

But the site also offered something much more important that changed our relationship with popularity forever. Recall that this was the same year in which reality competition shows first appeared on prime-time TV in countries all over the world. In the United States, _Survivor_ and _Big Brother_ appeared, soon followed by _American Idol_. It wasn’t long before versions of each would launch in over forty different countries. This was the era in which we were first introduced to the idea that anyone could achieve national fame, visibility, and positive regard from others, and in which the public could decide who was popular and who was not without ever leaving their living room couches.

That was likewise possible on Hot or Not. Its developers didn’t merely make attractiveness ratings of each picture confidentially available to the visitor who had submitted his or her photo. It posted those ratings publicly. Moreover, average ratings were rank-ordered and viewable on the site as a list of who received the most favorable votes. Suddenly we could reach an unfathomable number of people with the simple click of a button, and they could approve of us, or at least of our appearance, just as easily.

This opportunity for instant worldwide popularity is fundamental to all social media platforms today. Whether it’s Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, or Snapchat, the common goals are to get “likes,” or even to go “viral”—in other words, to become highly popular. What makes this so appealing?

Throughout this book, I have discussed factors that motivate us to care about what others think of us, both the forces that we’re conscious of and those well outside our awareness. Recall that one of these factors involves the unique way that our brains are organized, with the more primitive regions, in our limbic system, being especially sensitive to social rewards. In those moments in which we feel we are getting attention and approval from peers, fMRI studies reveal activation in the anterior cingulate cortex, which reflects the presence of neurotransmitters that make us feel good, giving us some of the same pleasure that we obtain from recreational drugs. And remember that the activation of these brain regions is important not only because it is pleasurable but also because it powerfully affects nearby brain regions that influence our feelings, motivate us to change our behavior, and even make us crave whatever we indirectly linked to the source of that pleasure.

In 2016, researchers at UCLA decided to investigate the extent to which social media may have the same effects on us. They did so by developing a clever approach to determine what happens in our brains at the very moments that we are viewing and “liking” what we see. They decided to conduct this study with adolescents aged thirteen to eighteen, which is the period during which the anterior cingulate cortex has just developed the advanced brain circuitry of adulthood.

The participants were asked to enter an fMRI scanner and interact with a platform that was designed to be similar to Instagram, the popular photo-sharing social media site. They had earlier asked each participant to submit his or her own Instagram photos, which they claimed would be viewed by fifty other teens who also were part of the study. This wasn’t true, but it enabled the experimenters to manipulate how many times each of the participant’s own photos had been “liked,” ostensibly by peers. Half of the subjects’ photos were randomly chosen to be popular among the peers, with a high number of “likes” recorded under each one. The other half were made to look as if they had gotten few “likes.”

Not surprisingly, they found that social media can provide a big boost of social rewards, which was reflected by dramatic effects in the brain. When participants viewed their own pictures and saw that they had been “liked” by many others, it was accompanied by significant activation in the anterior cingulate cortex, suggesting that the subjects experienced pleasure in a way that could be hard to resist—and even become addicting. The effects were surprisingly comparable to the rewards we receive when engaging in off-line interaction.

This may explain some of the reasons why social media has become so popular. In 2015, the Pew Research Center, a nonpartisan fact tank, reported that 76 percent of adolescents and 65 percent of adults in the United States use social media, the vast majority of whom report that they are online not just once, but several times a day. In fact, most Americans are on multiple social media sites, with 71 percent of all teens on Facebook, 52 percent on Instagram, 41 percent on Snapchat, 33 percent on Twitter, 33 percent on Google+, and 14 percent on Tumblr. Among adults, some of the most visited platforms may be different (less Snapchat, more Pinterest and LinkedIn), but the proportion of those active on these sites is fairly similar. Interestingly, there are only minimal to modest differences by gender, ethnicity, or economic status in social media use. Today, most youth and many adults report that they have more social interaction each day through social media platforms than they do face-to-face or voice-to-voice.

Much has been written about social media in the past two decades—some critics warn that it marks the end of society as we know it, with adverse effects on children’s development, adults’ productivity, and, through its natural cliquish segmentation of the world into those we follow and those we don’t, the degeneration of our unified global community. Others have extolled the virtues of social media and its unprecedented opportunity to provide social connections and viral information exchange at a magnitude that never before could have even been conceived.

Scientists have debated these points as well, with studies appearing more slowly than many would like, probably because the online world changes far too quickly for science to keep up. Initially data suggested that those who use social media extensively may be at risk for psychopathology, a concept that had begun to be known in the psychological literature as “Facebook depression.” Excessive use of the internet was even considered as a possible psychiatric diagnosis in the newest version of the _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders_ (_DSM_).

But research has come a long way since then, and we are now beginning to understand a bit more about how social media is changing our relationships. The effects of social media have less to do with whether we use it than _when_ we use it, _how_ we use it, and _who we were_ before we ever logged in.

My own lab has conducted a few studies to determine exactly what may go wrong, or right, when we use social media. For instance, following the lead of my graduate student Jackie Nesi, we have been able to demonstrate that excessive use of online communication during key life periods may have implications for the social proficiencies that are supposed to be developed in adolescence. Our results revealed that for young adolescent boys in particular, those who communicated with their romantic partners over the computer more than they did in person grew up to be a bit worse than others at basic romantic relationship skills, such as how to resolve arguments or express relationship needs.

In other work, we have learned that social media use also may be detrimental if we use it for the “wrong” reasons. In another study with about eight hundred teenagers, Jackie and I found that while many used social media to connect with old friends and make new ones, some lurkers were more interested in going online just to observe others. When they did, they were especially likely to compare themselves to their peers to determine whether they were as attractive, popular, and active as them. This may sound like something that characterizes teenagers, like the girls Ira Glass featured in his story on NPR’s _This American Life_ who reported pressure to immediately offer exaggerated compliments on their friends’ posts for fear of relationship sanctions. But looking at others’ post-worthy pictures and reading friends’ glowing remarks is part of how adults use social media as well. Our findings revealed that this use of online platforms to engage in “social comparison” and “feedback-seeking” was linked with later depression, especially for those who were unpopular and made “upward comparisons” while viewing the profiles of their peers.

To be clear, social media is not inherently bad. There may be some ill-advised ways of interacting on it and opportunities for abuse, but that can be said about almost any social activity. In fact, some suggest that social media may provide rapid coping support for those who have suffered adversity. It may help to establish social connections among those who may not have access to similar peers in their community. Social media may even help teens develop impression management skills or efficient communication patterns that may prove beneficial years later. Social media is not a problem. But it may be worth considering how it has begun to change our societal values at a much broader level. This is an issue we can address, because if we don’t, we may find ourselves surprised at what has become hot, and what is not.

—

My wife and I recently attended a dinner party. It was a great event. The food was delicious, the wine was flowing, and our laughter became so loud that we woke up our hosts’ kids. None of us knew more than a few of the other guests before we arrived, but we were all close friends by time dessert was served. It was around that time that a man sitting across the table from us remarked that he was disappointed that his wife had decided to stay home.

“Is she OK?” we asked.

“Oh no, sorry,” he explained. “She’s not home sick. She’s at home live-tweeting a TV show so she can get more followers on her Twitter.”

This incident reminded me of another occasion when I was at a restaurant with friends and observed nearby diners waiting to see how many “likes” they got on a photo of their dinner plate rather than talking to one another.

Or the time I was standing in front of the Sydney Opera House in Australia and overheard a group of friends debating which selfies would be best to post on their Facebook profiles rather than pictures of one another.

For me, each case highlighted the differences between the two types of popularity and made me wonder whether we had begun to lose sight of the one that really matters. In each of these instances, and in so many others that we all surely can recall, it seemed that people were choosing to invest in visibility, prominence, and immediate social rewards rather than in more meaningful social connections. People were, in short, choosing to pursue status over likability.

Some aspects of social media offer an excellent way to make friends, share mutual interests, and build relationships. Social media also provides an easily accessible platform where we can celebrate our achievements with peers and elicit social support when we feel down. It offers a route to track down old acquaintances and coworkers with whom we hope to reconnect, and a chance to get more detail about others’ lives than we might have time to share over a quick phone call or lunch. With every click that enables us to truly invest in others, express positive affect, or share a sentiment that helps our peers more than ourselves, we are also engaging in an activity that will make us more likable.

But we all know that that’s not the only kind of popularity that social media promotes, nor is it the only kind that people log in to obtain. Our online “friends” are not always people we are actually friends with or people we even know. On some platforms, there’s no attempt to even pretend that friendship is involved at all—the goal is simply to collect as many “followers” as possible, hundreds or even thousands of people who we know we will never meet and who will never know much of any substance about us. The goals are simply to be as visible as possible, to have as many people listen to us as possible, and to be as influential as possible. These are all classic markers of status.

“Like” buttons are also something of a misnomer, depending on the context. To those who click them, they can be a way of expressing heartfelt support or genuine emotional connection. But for those who obsessively seek “likes” (or “favorites” or “notes”), they are often just an attempt to get the rush that comes from seeing that we were seen and approved of by as many people as possible. Those who use social media extensively will acknowledge that, as exciting as it may be to see that a specific friend may have “liked” a post, it can be just as rewarding, if not much more so, to learn that hundreds of unknown people “liked” a post as well.

Ultimately our concern over living so much of our lives online should be less about how it affects us as individuals than its general repercussions on our culture. Although one can imagine an overdependency on seeking status online as eventually becoming problematic—and you probably know someone for whom this is true—for most of us, social media is used to feel a small status boost every now and then. That’s not so bad, particularly if we leverage our use of social media in ways that would make us likable at least as often as we seek recognition. Far more worrying is when the distinction between these two types of popularity gets lost among us as a society more generally. Whether you participate in social media or not, you know that rapid adoption of these platforms has had a profound effect on the world we live in and the kind of popularity that is valued.

—

In May 2015, _Tiger Beat_ magazine featured a cover story for its teen audience titled “How to Be Social Media Famous!” Inside was a six-page spread detailing exactly how readers could achieve the kind of popularity that was positioned as the ultimate success for a teen today.

It began with an article on the band 5 Seconds of Summer, revealing how fame, fortune, and millions of fans were the means by which each member “bounced back from unpopularity.” At first, they were all “loners,” “geeks,” and “invisible,” the article noted, but now “a whole lot of people like [them].”

The feature went on to explain how to get as many followers as possible on social media. It urged readers to post as often as possible, take their phones everywhere they went, stay engaged with whatever is already big and popular, and so on.

There were interviews with “teen celebrities,” each defined by the number of his or her followers. Many of their stories were the same: They were once sad and lonely, but now, with so many followers, they had found happiness. A sidebar encouraged kids to hire a social media manager if they wanted to find similar happiness. “This isn’t a casual hobby,” one manager advised. “It’s a career.”

Adults get the same messages in their own media consumption. “Blow Up Your Feed: The 10 Commandments of Taking Instagram Food Pics,” the foodie magazine _Bon Appétit_ advised its readers. The article in question offered tips designed to help Instagram users get the most “likes” as possible with their pictures of food. One came from a user highlighted as having 264,000 followers: “Foods that are universally popular and that people really want to eat always do well.” Another suggested, “Sweets and little treats appeal to the widest audience. Who doesn’t get excited when they see ice cream?” For its part,_Forbes_ encouraged its readers to use “known hashtags” and to “like hundreds of random pictures from people in your target audience.”

If we look away from the magazine rack, it may not surprise anyone that YouTube now includes over thirteen thousand different video tutorials on topics like “How to Take the Perfect Selfie.” In fact, the “selfie stick” market has become a multimillion-dollar industry worldwide. So many people take photos of themselves, and occasionally do so in dangerous situations, that the Russian government has released guidelines to reduce selfie-taking-related deaths. Cover Girl cosmetics has even released a line of makeup designed specifically to look good in selfie shots.

In contrast, YouTube offers only about four hundred videos on “How to Be More Likable.” I watched a few, and ironically, most are actually about gaining status as well.

Why should this trouble us? The answer lies in what we have learned from neuroscience. For instance, in the same UCLA study mentioned earlier, the researchers decided to examine their participants’ neural responses not only to their own photos they had posted on Instagram but also to a series of photos that the investigators had acquired. They included some images that depicted provocative subjects (aggressive gestures, inappropriately dressed teens, illegal substances) while others were of neutral ones (household objects, coffee, unfamiliar peers). Again, they randomly selected half of these pictures to ostensibly have been judged to be popular, with many “likes,” and half to have only a few “likes.”

The results suggested that our interest in what is popular may be so strong that it can begin to undermine our values. When the participants viewed the provocative pictures that had gotten only a few “likes,” they responded in much the way you might hope or expect: they were unlikely to “like” the photos themselves, and the responses in their brains reflected activity in the prefrontal cortex, a region that activates when we hit the brakes and stop ourselves from engaging in impulsive acts. But when provocative photos were made to look popular, the response was just the opposite—adolescents were dramatically more likely to “like” the picture themselves. Moreover, simply seeing that the picture had many “likes” on social media reduced their prefrontal cortex activity, releasing the brain’s brakes. In other words, just by associating pictures with the number of “likes” they had ostensibly obtained, social media suddenly had made provocative acts “hot,” while neutral acts were “not.”

This finding has serious implications. It suggests that the more we value status, the more our ability to distinguish between good and bad may be compromised. Popularity can become the only value that matters, and we will begin to confuse status for quality in ways that do not bode well for the century to come.
