## CHAPTER 8

## Parenting for Popularity

## Can Mom and Dad Make a Difference, and Should They?

Just outside Portland, Oregon, around the start of June each year, two hundred townsfolk gather in the local school auditorium for the kindergarten student showcase. The event is a time-honored tradition—a rite of passage for every resident who has ever attended elementary school there.

It is an event that Peggy remembers vividly. About thirty years ago, she was standing onstage in that auditorium behind two rows of classmates as they took turns singing a verse from _The Sound of Music_ songbook. But while her classmates smiled and waved to their families from the stage, Peggy hid in the back, emerging only when cued by the start of the melody to “My Favorite Things.” Suddenly Peggy’s palms became slick and warm. She walked slowly toward center stage as the children ahead of her sang their parts. By the time they had reached the “warm woolen mittens,” Peggy’s heart already was beating twice as fast as the music. She finally reached the front of the stage and looked out at the crowd of parents, teachers, and schoolmates all staring up at her. The lights were hot, she could hear her own breath, and it seemed as if the music slowed just as it came her turn to sing. Finally, she opened her mouth . . .

Peggy did not enjoy her kindergarten year. Born to immigrant parents, she looked a little different from her classmates. Her body was noticeably rounder. Her hair was darker, and her clothes came from a secondhand store. Her parents didn’t know many others in their community, so Peggy usually played alone on the weekends. On occasions when she was able to convince her mother to take her to the neighborhood park, the visit always seemed to end in despair. While her mom read a book, some issue inevitably led to a shouting match between Peggy and the other kids.

On that June morning of the school assembly, the choice of verse for Peggy was particularly unfortunate. As she began to sing she could hear snickers from her schoolmates in the front rows. Her voice quivered just as she reached the part about crisp apple strudel and schnitzel with noodles.

“Piggy!” one child screamed.

“She’s even bigger than Captain von Trapp!” shouted another.

The whole first row laughed. The adults tried to hush the children, but they continued to taunt her. By the time the verse was over, Peggy’s cheeks were covered with tears, and she ran off the stage into the arms of her teacher.

In the decades since the kindergarten showcase, Peggy hadn’t thought much about it, but as her daughter stood on that same stage, and the accompaniment to _The Sound of Music_ began, the pain of that experience came flooding back. There stood her own child, dressed as an Austrian schoolgirl, and her turn to sing was approaching. Peggy could feel her own hands beginning to perspire.

—

Do you remember kindergarten? Can you picture the details of your classroom or your teacher? What were the other kids in your class like? Did you play with them or watch them from afar? Were they kind to you?

Is there a particular incident or scene that stands out in your mind from back then? Why do you think this remains your clearest memory after so many years? What does that event mean to you?

These questions were posed to a group of mothers by Duke professor Martha Putallaz as part of a study she conducted on children’s popularity. Each mother had a child in kindergarten at the time she was asked to participate. I once conducted a similar study, and like Putallaz, I found that mothers’ recollections of their own childhood peer experiences varied quite dramatically.

“It reminds me of how important it is to have strong bonds with friends . . . it was a great time,” one participant wrote.

“It reminds me how cruel and mean kids can be, and I always pray my own kids’ feelings don’t get hurt like that,” said another.

A third replied, “I was somewhat insecure, cared what others thought, felt isolated.”

Studies that ask mothers to recall their early experiences with peers reliably find that, based on their most salient memories, they fall into one of three categories. Putallaz found that one group of mothers had positive memories. When these women remembered kindergarten, they recalled their peers as a source of fun, happiness, and excitement. Over half of her respondents relayed stories with joyous, positive themes, with scarcely any trace of regret, fear, or sadness.

As one woman wrote, “I had happy times with my friends . . . I felt confident and comfortable with myself when I was with them.”

Other mothers’ memories were less pleasant. Putallaz divided these subjects into two groups. One included women whose recollections were of aggression, hostility, and meanness. In their accounts, their childhood peers were a source of ridicule and cruelty. Sometimes these themes were recalled in the context of an otherwise positive memory, but they were notable nevertheless when compared to those women whose recollections were completely positive.

“It hurt so much,” one woman remembered. “The teasing was so antagonizing to me . . . it represents the pain we suffer as children to try to fit in, belong, and have people like us.”

The third group of mothers had recollections that were characterized by anxiety or loneliness. The stories offered by these women involved unrequited longing for peers, feeling left out, and watching from the sidelines. These were experiences that many believed left them damaged years later.

As one said, “It set a pattern for me that made me uncomfortable in groups of strangers.”

After this group of mothers offered their own childhood peer memories, Putallaz then studied how their children fared in their own social lives at school. She asked their kindergarten classmates to nominate which children they liked most and which they liked least. She used this information to derive a score of each child’s popularity—the type of popularity based on likability. The results revealed that even with the small amount of information she had about each mother, Putallaz was able to predict which children would be most or least popular.

Popularity was remarkably consistent across generations. Mothers who recalled their own peer experiences as positive had children who were above average in popularity. Mothers with memories of hostile experiences had unpopular children. But unexpectedly, the women with anxious or lonely memories had children who did not appear to be at all unpopular. In fact, children with anxious/lonely mothers were either of average popularity or, in some cases, just as well liked as the kids with positive moms.

Putallaz’s results raise two interesting questions.

Can popularity be inherited? If so, why do children of mothers with happy memories and those of mothers with anxious/lonely kindergarten recollections both do equally well with their peers?

Of course, it’s impossible to ascertain whether the mothers accurately recalled their childhood experiences. Memories are not always reliable, and in this particular study, the recollections offered by mothers could have been as much a reflection of their children’s lives today as anything that occurred to them decades earlier. For this reason, Putallaz referred to the mothers’ recollections as “social frames”—lenses through which they view past, current, and future social experiences. What Putallaz found was that moms with positive social frames and those with anxious/lonely social frames were much more similar than might be expected in at least one important respect: both cared deeply about how their children interacted with peers. Specifically, both reported much stronger intentions to help their children become likable than the mothers with hostile social frames. And this seemed to make all of the difference.

This leads to the two questions I am often asked by concerned parents: First, can they help make their children more popular? And second, should they?

—

The short answer to the first question is yes: parents _can_ affect their children’s popularity in several ways. Some of these are well within our control—others are not.

For instance, parents influence their kids’ popularity through genetics. No single gene can make a person popular, as far as we know, but a group of them seem to give some kids an edge and others a lifelong disadvantage.

Physical appearance is one example of an inherited trait. We usually think of beauty as being a contributing factor to the type of popularity that emerges in adolescence and is based on status and dominance. But physical attractiveness is a predictor of likability too, and attractive parents tend to have attractive children.

Countless studies have demonstrated the powerful effect of physical beauty on popularity. Some of this work has focused on body attractiveness. Obese children, for example, are more likely to be teased by others than are those with average body shapes, even as early as preschool. But most research has focused specifically on facial features, suggesting that looks play an important role in determining whom we like and whom we don’t—even well before sexual attraction per se is a factor.

In a typical study, a group of adults is asked to review a series of photos of children’s faces and rate each on attractiveness. To make sure these ratings are not influenced by how wealthy or happy each child may appear, photos are cropped so that the raters cannot see the children’s hair or clothes, and all the faces have a neutral expression. These attractiveness ratings are then compared to children’s likability, as reported by their peers. Findings from investigations like these reveal that the most attractive children are also the most popular. The children rated least attractive are the most strongly rejected, even among children as young as five years old.

How can this be? Have kindergarteners already absorbed the standards by which our society values beauty? Have they developed biases against less attractive peers?

It seems to go deeper than that. Research conducted by psychologist Judith Langlois at the University of Texas at Austin finds that even infants at three months old stare longer at attractive faces than unattractive ones. It doesn’t matter whether the faces belong to adults or other infants, or whether they are from the same or different ethnic groups. Infants are also more likely to be fussy around unattractive strangers.

Why, starting at birth, are we hardwired to prefer attractiveness? Some think it’s because we are programmed to propagate, and attractive faces signal good genetic health, increasing the chances for successful reproduction. Others suggest that attractive faces are favored by babies because they best represent the prototype of what a face is supposed to look like. Langlois has demonstrated that attractive people have faces that are more symmetrical than others, and more “typical” as well. When she digitally combined photographs of a number of different faces to create a composite, the result always appeared more attractive than the individual faces used to make it—even if all of the faces were already very attractive. Our idea of attractiveness is based in large part on facial “averageness.” As infants, we are drawn toward the average or typical because it helps us contextualize all of the new things we are exposed to. It is an instinct we are born with to help us understand what is prototypical, and then we can understand everything else as deviating from that average template.

Because our predilection for attractive people is present from birth, our good-looking peers have a head start on becoming the most likable people in our social circle. Research shows that teachers pay greater attention to the better-looking children in their classrooms. Even parents, in subtle ways, tend to offer greater comfort and support to their more handsome offspring.

Note that beauty is not the only inheritable trait that contributes to popularity, however. There also is a genetic basis for our general comfort level when we interact with others. This is not extroversion per se but rather an attribute that is referred to as “behavioral inhibition,” which is more broadly associated with an interest in what is new and different versus a preference for what is comfortable and familiar. As one might imagine, babies who are genetically disposed to be socially inhibited are less interested in interacting with others, which has a direct effect on popularity. Each avoided social interaction is another lost opportunity to develop social skills that will be needed to become accepted, likable children years later.

But genes do not always control our destiny, especially in our social lives. Just as those of us who don’t have the genetic foundation to be models or movie stars may still be considered beautiful, research has found that inherited predispositions toward popularity or unpopularity are also substantially influenced by powerful environmental factors.

—

It’s noon and I am near my hometown on Long Island, in New York. It has been years since I lived here, so I feel like a tourist, watching the people around me like a foreigner would gape at the natives. As I sit in the cafeteria of the local Ikea, I watch the crowd of kids screaming in every direction while their parents bicker over the decision between a Duken and a Fjell. Suddenly a tray of food falls to the floor just behind me, but before I can turn around to help clean up the mess, I hear a woman, presumably a mother, whispering so loudly, and so tensely, that she might as well be yelling.

“What. Are. You. _Doing?_ ” she asks. “Get your hands in your lap right now. You think this is funny? If you drop one more thing, I promise you won’t be laughing anymore!”

Too stunned to turn around, I sit very still, not meaning to eavesdrop but unable to help hearing the argument that has erupted just inches behind my head.

“Honey, let it go,” a man’s voice says. “She doesn’t know what she’s doing.”

“I’m sick of it,” the woman replies. “She does it on purpose. She just loves to aggravate me.” She sighs and then exasperatedly snaps at the child, “Why won’t you _listen_?”

At this point, I lean over to pick up a sippy cup that has landed at my feet and turn to hand it to the woman. She takes it from me, rolls her eyes while nodding to her child, and offers her thanks. I catch a glimpse of the cup-thrower: she is only about eighteen months old and giggling in her high chair. She has no idea why it’s not permissible to push a tray onto the floor.

I don’t know anything about this woman or her child, but anyone can tell that this mother is overstressed, and research suggests that adults like her may not have been very well liked when they were younger. Studies have also indicated that children like that little girl might grow up to have problems with popularity, too. The same will be true of _her_ children, because popularity is related not only to the kind of parents we had but also to the kind of parents we become.

One of the factors that most strongly predicts who will be popular and who will be rejected is whether they are raised in an aggressive social environment, an atmosphere that tends to persist across generations of a family. Psychologists can measure a child’s social environment fairly easily. In fact, the way parents complete just one simple task can offer remarkable insight into their own past and their children’s future.

The assignment is easy: talk about your child for five minutes. Parents effectively practice this all the time. After running into an old friend they haven’t seen for years or a colleague on an elevator, they are typically asked, “So, how are the kids?” Almost all parents can go on at great length in response, but their answers differ greatly.

Psychologists Terrie Moffitt and Avshalom Caspi asked almost six hundred mothers from England and Wales to complete this task with respect to their five-year-old children. The researchers were interested in learning how warm or critical the children’s social environments were, and after only five minutes of conversation with their parent, they discovered a world of differences. They also wanted to investigate how this social environment may be related to children’s aggressive and unpopular behavior. Interestingly, they chose to include only monozygotic twins in their study, which enabled them to ensure that any differences they identified in children’s behavior could not be explained by genetic variation, since each pair of twins had identical DNA.

They found that even though they were born at the same time, to the same parents, in the same household, and with the same genetic makeup, each twin grew up in seemingly very different social environments. This was evident from the ways that their mother spoke about them. Some of the women offered descriptions and details about their children that communicated warmth and affection (“She is so funny—the other day she made up a song and she was dancing and singing in the garden”) while others were far more critical (“She is horrible” or “He is so lazy”).

Moffitt and Caspi returned to their subjects two years later to see how the children were growing up. Now, at seven years old, some were highly aggressive, while others were well behaved. These outcomes were strongly predicted by the social environments in which they grew up. The results are especially notable given that the researchers even saw differences between identical twins. The more warmly mothers spoke of their children at age five, the less aggressive their children were at age seven. The more critical the mother, the more her child’s aggression increased over the two-year period. Subsequent research has confirmed the link: mothers who are critical when discussing their children, even for as short a time as five minutes, tend to create more hostile social environments for their children, who subsequently grow up to be unpopular.

It’s not just aggression—there are plenty of other qualities in a child’s social environment that also predict his or her popularity. For instance, research has revealed a long list of ways in which depressed mothers may differ from other moms, and many of these have a direct impact on their children’s eventual popularity, too. Compared to other mothers, depressed women discipline their children less effectively. They spend less time with their children and smile less often. Depressed moms also may pass along genes that predispose their kids to be sad or withdrawn. Probably for these reasons, these kids are much more likely to have social difficulties years later.

When it comes to the factors that set children on a path toward popularity or rejection, even seemingly trivial interactions can make a difference. Picture a baby lying in her or his crib, looking up at a dangling mobile. If its mother is feeling playful, her smiling face may suddenly appear—she may even tickle her baby—causing the infant to laugh and kick with glee. The laughter is so infectious that mom turns the moment into a little game. She again makes a surprise appearance over the crib, the baby laughs in return, and the process continues, over and over. After a few giggling exchanges, the mom may turn on the mobile to help soothe her baby, who falls peacefully asleep.

This sounds pretty normal, but can such a brief episode really affect a baby’s eventual popularity? Can it influence his or her entire life?

It can. Those few moments during which the infant had a chance to see Mom smiling produced a biological reaction in the baby’s brain. Research suggests that this reaction will help the child cope with stress more productively for decades to come. This will help her remain calm when a peer makes her angry at school years later, or even decades after that, when she becomes a mom and her own baby cries. The game of peekaboo also taught the baby the concept of turn taking, which is a fundamental social skill we use in every successful conversation. Watching her mom smile got her excited, and that, too, is critical for teaching children how to experience strong emotions and how to regulate them. Mothers who are depressed may deprive their children of some of these opportunities, and consequently, research studies find, these children are far less capable of managing their emotional outbursts.

As that baby drifts off to sleep watching her mobile, she is also learning how to calm herself—a skill that never would have been acquirable had her mother not approached her crib in the first place. Of course, this small episode had transactional effects, too, as described in Chapter 5. The more fun that Mom had playing this game, the more likely she will be to play it again, giving that baby even more opportunities to practice all of the same social skills.

—

If you weren’t very popular when you were a child, the results of the studies cited above may have tempted you to draft an angry email to your parents right about now. It would be easy to blame them for all of the ways that they compromised the development of your social skills and your opportunities for social success.

And if you are a parent, you may be feeling a little pressured or guilty based on this research. Believe me, I understand. When my own kids were born, I felt bombarded by a barrage of information on how I was supposed to raise them and what kinds of things I could do to help my kids reach their full potential. It was all very helpful, but ultimately exhausting, and seemed to set a virtually impossible standard. After all, what parent hasn’t lost patience, felt hopeless, or said something critical to a child that they later regretted? At times, we all feel frustrated with our kids. And with one out of every five women and one out of every ten men in the United States experiencing a clinically significant depressive episode by age twenty-five, it’s worrisome to think that any time we express a sad mood we might be damaging a child’s long-term success with peers. It’s simply impractical to expect that we can play peekaboo with a baby twenty-four hours a day.

But we can let ourselves off the hook, at least a little, because a child’s popularity isn’t completely within her parents’ control. The key factor is the nature of the relationship _between_ parent and child, and this has as much to do with how parents behave as with what children bring into each social interaction. It is the back-and-forth, the constant give-and-take, that shapes both parents and children, and that also strongly influences a child’s social development. Psychologists refer to this as the parent-child “attachment.”

Parent-child attachments come in two types: secure or insecure. It takes only about twenty minutes to identify which version describes a particular family unit. A parent brings his or her nine- to eighteen-month-old baby to an unfamiliar room. After playing together, a friendly adult stranger joins them, and over the next few minutes, the baby stays alternatively in the room either with his parent, with the stranger, or with both. Psychologists measure whether the child seems more likely to explore and play with the parent, the stranger, or with neither in the room. The baby’s reaction to the inconspicuous disappearance of his parent also is noted, as well as how he reacts when the parent returns.

About two-thirds of parent-child pairings prove to be securely attached, which is established by the fact that the child is most likely to play when his parent is nearby. Securely attached children become mildly distressed when their parent steps out, are a little skittish around the stranger, and then are quickly soothed when the parent returns. Parents in securely attached relationships respond in ways that show that they are highly attuned to their child’s distress, able to help their baby calm down, and attentive to what their child needs.

But in insecurely attached relationships, any number of things can go wrong. Some babies don’t appear to be entirely comfortable with their parents and even seem to avoid them altogether. Others are overly clingy. Some are inconsolable when their parents leave the room; others don’t even seem to notice. Parents, for their part, may be overly responsive or seemingly unconcerned about their child’s behavior.

Research has demonstrated that infants in secure attachments grow up to have far more interpersonal success. Not only are they more popular but they also are happier in their romantic relationships and are more likely to form secure attachments with their own children. In one study, a team of Dutch researchers led by Marinus van IJzendoorn measured parent-child attachment in twelve-month-olds who were adopted; thus any connection between their outcomes and their parents’ behavior could not be attributed to shared genes. They found that at age seven, children who had been securely attached as infants were far more likely to be popular, according to their schoolmates, than those who were insecurely attached, even after accounting for socioeconomic status and individual temperament. Studies that looked at the effects of attachment with a father have found the exact same effects.

It also may be comforting to learn that parents can easily change the family’s social environment. In fact, one way they can affect their children’s later popularity is by playing games with them. But it depends on _how_ they play.

When psychologists Ross Parke, Gregory Pettit, and Jackie Mize observed parents playing with their children, they noticed differences that help set the stage for how children learn to behave socially. Some parents, Mize and Pettit found, play with their children as equals. They let their kids decide what game to play, make up the rules for original games, and decide when to switch to another. They talk a lot to their kids while playing, and they express a range of emotions. Their children grow up much more likely to be accepted by their peers. Through these moments of parent-child interaction, kids learn how to share and cooperate, be creative and explorative, and empathize with others. In other words, these moments of play are rich opportunities to learn emotional intelligence.

But not all parents play in this manner. Some dominate, set stern limits, and remain reserved, even stoic while playing with their children. Not surprisingly, their children behave in the same way when playing with others their own age. The more that mothers asserted their own power when interacting with their children, especially when they displayed an absence of warmth or responsiveness to children’s needs, the more aggressive their children were with peers even years later, and ultimately they became very unpopular.

The way that fathers play is also important. Compared to mothers, dads are more likely to be rough-and-tumble with their kids. Children typically laugh much harder and get more excited when wrestling with a parent than when, say, putting a puzzle together. These highly physical play sessions are valuable for teaching children how to regulate strong emotions. Moms and dads who express their own emotions freely while playing, and demonstrate how to safely control those feelings, also have children who grow up to be more popular. That’s likely due to the fact that children learn from their parents how to express themselves, cope, and get support when they need it.

Of course, being responsive to children’s needs and involved in their play can go too far. If you’ve ever been to a playground, you have seen what this looks like. When kids are playing, swinging, sliding, and climbing, eventually someone falls. It’s the shock of the fall that is more upsetting than any actual injury, and the child looks as if he may start to cry. But he doesn’t—at least not immediately. The first thing he does is look up at Mom or Dad. If the parent remains calm, the child might brush himself off and return to playing. But if the parent looks worried or upset, the tears begin.

Some parents may even overreact. They run to their child and coddle them, remaining very close by—closer than is needed for their child’s age—to make sure he doesn’t fall again. Or they may get themselves so stressed over the possibility of a future fall that they decide to take the child and leave the playground altogether. Research suggests that these children are much more likely to be victimized by their peers when they are older. Having parents who are hypersensitive to their children’s emotions and overly protective is a strong predictor of unpopularity.

—

Parents can also influence their offspring’s future popularity by directly intervening in their social lives. Consider Sam, who is a proud dad. His son, Joey, looks exactly like him, with the same curly hair, lanky frame, and freckles running up his arms. Sam loves watching Joey grow up. In the afternoons, he stands proudly in the ballpark as Joey runs the bases. On Saturdays, he likes to be nearby while Joey jokes around with his friends. Wherever Joey goes, Sam is not far behind.

When Joey’s school hosted a party, Sam called another parent to see if his son could attend it with her daughter. In the gym, Sam looked on while Joey and the girl got punch together, made their way around the dance floor, and sat at a table together. “Don’t forget to share!” Sam called out. When Joey started to lean very close to his date, Sam admonished, “Use your words. Keep your hands to yourself!”

Joey turned around, red-faced, glared at his father, and ran out of the party.

Sam was doing what any good parent might do—a parent of a preschooler, that is. But Joey was seventeen years old, and the occasion was his high school’s homecoming dance. In that context, Sam seems far too involved in his child’s peer relationships.

Do you know parents who effectively become personal assistants to their kids? They set up playdates for their one-year-olds and later enroll their kids in music or gymnastics classes to play with other toddlers. It seems they spend much of the day driving their little ones to activities and appointments.

Don’t scoff—these are precisely the steps parents can take to help make their children become more likable among their peers, and indeed these are very appropriate ways to parent a toddler. But the effectiveness of this approach depends on when and how parents manage their children’s social lives, according to Arizona State University psychologist Gary Ladd. Ladd suggests three specific ways that parents can increase their child’s likability.

The first has to do with setting up playdates. While it is important for children to have the chance to play with others, it’s not merely creating the opportunities for play that matters most. Rather, it’s how that parent sets up these encounters that makes the biggest difference. When their children are two, Ladd says, some parents already contact others, coordinate get-togethers, and select friends. While these companions and playdates help children develop a broader social network, parents should change the way they intervene as their kids get older. By three, children should be able to pick which peers they are most interested in seeing. By four, they should be able to choose the activities they will engage in during the playdate, and by five or six, children should start taking the lead in initiating meet-ups.

Developmental psychologists call this “scaffolding,” and the metaphor is apt. At each stage of his or her development, it’s important to provide only as much support as a child needs, but no more. Structure can be withdrawn as the child is able to stand well on their own. Ladd found that by kindergarten the children who grew up to be most popular were those whose parents taught them how to identify compatible playmates, ask them if they wanted to meet outside of school, and suggest activities. Soon they are able to do so independently, which helps accelerate the learning curve for future social interactions.

As kids get older, this translates into learning how to introduce oneself to new groups and eventually how to trust others in close relationships. These skills continue to grow more complex, of course, and soon children have to learn how to think of others first, balancing their own preferences with what is best for the group. They learn how to respect differences between themselves and others. Even in middle school, parents can help scaffold more intricate social negotiations, such as whom to invite to a birthday celebration when seats are limited, or how to decline an invitation when two or more events are occurring simultaneously. Each of these tasks is a chance for kids to learn how to live in an increasingly sophisticated social world. Research suggests that children who learn these skills in childhood are better able to transition into romantic relationships later in life.

A second way that parents can affect their child’s popularity has to do with the way they get involved in their kids’ playdates. The more that parents monitor their children while they play during their very early years, the better. In one study, parents and their one- to two-year-old children attended a play session with other toddlers. At first, the parents were instructed to either join their children as they played or remain uninvolved. The parents then left, leaving the kids to play on their own for a few minutes longer. Those whose parents had been instructed to get involved were more likely to remain happy and play amicably with their peers after the parents departed. Those whose parents had been uninvolved fell apart more quickly. When the same experiment was conducted with kids just a few years older, however, the results were the opposite. For preschoolers, heavy parent involvement was no longer as helpful.

By preschool and kindergarten, parents monitor from afar, which offers them an important opportunity to ask children later what they did with their friends, whether they had any disagreements, and how they helped resolve those problems. These are rich conversations that help kids understand how to identify their emotions, what they were thinking about a given situation, and how they behaved. So, if a kid comes home and says, “When Johnny grabbed my truck to play with it himself, I punched him in the face,” it is a good teachable moment to explore alternative solutions. “How did you feel when he did that?” a parent might ask. “Did he ask you first whether you would share?” “Had you been playing with it for very long?” “What are other things you could have done when he took the truck?” “How does it make you feel when someone punches you?” and so on.

Not only does this help children in the short term, but it also sets the stage for how they will think about social experiences, manage their feelings, consider various solutions, and evaluate how those solutions worked—a nice framework that many wish adults drew upon more often. These are skills that predict not only which kids will become more popular, but also those who will have higher levels of academic achievement.

A third tip has to do with how parents coach their children when they have experienced a problem. This is a matter of more than simply listening to children recount what they did during an afternoon with their peers. It involves, rather, a parent’s offering specific instruction and practice regarding the management of peer relationships. Of course, most parents will offer such basic guidelines as “Don’t hit others,” “Share your toys,” and “Say please and thank you.” But the type of coaching that is especially important is the advice adults offer regarding the event in question and the way they model how to act in social situations.

Typically, parents coach their children to behave like they do. It’s quite remarkable the degree to which children model themselves on their parents. It’s not just the little things, either, like the way my own daughter has my facial expressions or how my son uses his hands when he talks, just like I do. Such behavior is also reflected in how kids decide to interact with one another.

In another one of her studies on intergenerational similarities in popularity, Martha Putallaz asked mothers to bring their children to her lab at Duke to play together. Using a one-way mirror, Putallaz and her research assistants were able to watch the children play and record the extent to which each was agreeable and cooperative, or aggressive. Meanwhile, each child’s mom was observed talking with the mothers of the other children being studied. The children of the women who conversed amicably in one room behaved in the same companionable way with their peers just down the hall. Moms who tried to dominate their conversations tended to have children who were also excessively self-focused in their interactions.

Preschool children rely on their parents to be coaches—studies have shown that parents talk to their children about how to interact with peers at least once every other day, and this predicts children’s popularity. Of course, some don’t simply coach but insert themselves into their children’s social interactions to help kids negotiate their way into a game or out of a fight. By middle school, such parental behaviors are considered intrusive and remarkably damaging to kids’ popularity. Older children and adolescents still need their parents to guide them, but they like to believe that they didn’t ask for help. Nevertheless, in one study examining how coaching helped teenagers interact with peers they had not met before, findings revealed that parental involvement made a difference. Those parents who spoke with their children about peers, reviewed the best qualities to look for in a friend, or discussed the best ways to act with others had kids who developed closer relationships within just a few months.

—

For all of the speculation on how parents’ own popularity might affect their parenting years later, and all of the research on how moms and dads can affect how well their children do with peers, one question has gone unexplored: _should_ parents try to affect their children’s popularity at all?

The answer is both yes and no.

I say yes, because as a clinical child psychologist, I strongly recommend that parents be alert to those kids who are having issues with likability. Sometimes it’s clear that there are problems afoot.

I remember one five-year-old boy who was so rambunctious and energetic that he never stopped to play with other kids at school. He just ran by as they called out for him to join their games. When it came time for him to pick a partner on a school trip, he didn’t have anyone who wanted to sit with him.

Then there was the short-tempered girl who only talked to her peers aggressively in an impatient tone. You could almost hear the echo of her parents yelling at her every time she told her classmates that they were being “bad, bad children.” It didn’t take long for her to be rejected by all of her classmates—a status she reinforced every day when she would scream at anyone who dared to try to play with her.

Another girl was so painfully skittish that just being at school was a difficult experience for her. She clung to her father’s leg until she was forcibly detached, and then she never ventured more than a few feet from her teacher. She cried all day, even when the other kids seemed to have sympathy for her and kindly asked her to join them on the swings.

It’s these kids—the ones who before first grade already seem to be shunned by peers, those who have more tears than laughs with others, or those who just don’t seem that interested in joining in—who may benefit from some degree of intervention. Because it is these kids who will suffer from the worst manifestation of unpopularity, bullying—a crisis finally getting attention from a worldwide audience.

Psychologists have been interested in understanding the causes and consequences of bullying for many years, but it was only after the massacre in Columbine that the rest of the world began to take serious notice of this problem. On April 20, 1999, two teens who had purportedly been victimized by their peers brought guns and bombs to their Colorado high school, viciously killing twelve fellow students and one teacher, wounding twenty-one others, and ultimately turning their weapons on themselves to end their own lives. Americans stood in shock as the details came to light of how these seemingly typical teens had suddenly turned to rage and murder. It was not the first mass killing to take place in a school and sadly not the last. School shootings in the years since have become so disturbingly frequent that most of us can’t help but simply hope that such tragedies never come to our own community.

In their wake, however, came a renewed interest in peer victimization. When federal anti-bullying legislation was proposed, but failed, states enacted their own laws, proposing severe sanctions on any student who bullied another on school grounds. These laws and the rise of public attention to the issue have helped. Overt forms of bullying no longer occur quite as frequently in those schools that have imposed severe penalties. But the popularity dynamics that underlie bullying haven’t gone away, and of course kids have found plenty of ways to bully one another more covertly, whether anonymously, away from school, or even online.

There is now evidence that some anti-bullying measures are effective at reducing instances of peer victimization, but it would be wishful thinking to believe that all bullying will stop, as kids have been victimized by other children since the beginning of time. What’s needed is an equal focus on helping children cope with those moments when they will be teased, excluded, tormented, or even derisively talked about by their peers. And psychologists know exactly how parents can help.

Have you and a friend ever experienced a stressful event and both walked away with a completely different reaction to it? That happens all the time, and it’s due to the fact that what we _feel_ about a given situation has much less to do with what actually happens to us than it does with what we _think_ about what took place.

Imagine two children who fail a history exam. One blames herself, regrets the decisions she made the night before the test, and begins to feel hopeless that she will ever do well in school. The other blames the teacher, decides the test was unfair, and remains emotionally unscathed.

The difference between how these two students responded to a stressful incident is what psychologists call “attributional style.” Do you attribute negative life events to your own characteristics (“I’m stupid”) that are both global (“I can’t do anything right”) and stable (“I will never do well at school”)? This kind of attributional style is a fast track to depression. Ascribing all negative events to ourselves, leaving no room for improvements or alternative explanations, enables stressors to have their worst impact on us psychologically—particularly if this is the way we habitually react.

Or do you attribute such experiences to things that have nothing to do with you (“The test was poorly constructed”), are specific (“I don’t do well when tests use multiple choice”), or are unstable (“I would probably do better if I had more time to study”)? This is the healthier response, though it does not imply that people shouldn’t also take responsibility for their actions.

In 1998, Sandra Graham and Jaana Juvonen did a study in which they asked 418 sixth- and seventh-grade children to talk about how they would respond if they were victimized by peers. The group had widely different responses. Some said that if they were teased it would be due to their own failings or self-deficits. (“This will happen to me again.” “If I were a cooler kid, I wouldn’t get picked on.” “It’s my fault, I shouldn’t have been in the restroom/locker room.”) Graham and Juvonen found that it was these kids who were at greatest risk for depression, anxiety, and low levels of self-esteem. They were also most likely to be rejected by peers and at risk for further victimization.

But others had a more adaptive response that recognized that being bullied may not have had as much to do with them specifically. (“These kids pick on everybody.” “It was my bad luck to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.”) These kids were fine in the long run.

Parents have a very significant influence on the kind of attributional style their children develop, and again, the similarities across generations are remarkable. Attributional style is also a characteristic that is relatively easy to modify.

Imagine a world where we cast the bullies not as those with the power to intimidate others but as those who likely are experiencing the most profound psychological difficulties. They may seem cool, and they may get lots of attention when they successfully victimize others. But this is only a sign of the kind of popularity we recognize as based on status, which ultimately leads to bad outcomes, like loneliness, addiction, and an ongoing preoccupation with social standing. Bullies often have the harshest upbringings, having watched their parents fight and intimidate one another. They have often been victims themselves, and their aggressive ways may be cries for attention, in the form of status-seeking.

In some ways, it is troubling that new zero-tolerance legislation immediately expels bullies. While it is an effective way to protect their victims and sends a strong warning to other aggressors, these are the kids who may be in most desperate need of help. Expelling them from school offers a good short-term solution, but it may be sending those who are highly vulnerable directly back to where they learned to become so aggressive.

While no one expects victims to easily or suddenly sympathize with their tormentors, parents can help in a way that few others can by teaching their children to understand why other kids behave this way. When victims realize that they have a choice about how to interpret why they have been bullied, they are more likely to emerge from victimization bruised, perhaps, but psychologically unharmed.

—

Earlier, I suggested that there are cases, such as those described above, when it makes sense for parents to try to influence their child’s popularity. But does it follow that parents should always try to make their children more popular?

Some parents feel inclined to do so. They want their child to be the one with the most friends, invited to the most parties, and the one picked first for every team or class project. They speak proudly when they relate how all the other kids look up to their own son or daughter.

Here, I would say no—this is not a great idea, because encouraging popularity of this type is a hairsbreadth away from encouraging kids to value status instead of likability. It’s the very tactic a desperate stage parent turns to, trying too hard to have his child live out his own popularity fantasies.

In 1991, Texas mother Wanda Holloway was so desperate for her daughter to become a popular cheerleader that she conspired to murder the mother of her daughter’s chief competitor, hoping it would lead to an open spot on the squad. There are two aspects of this story that are distasteful. One is the homicidal behavior, naturally. But the other was that a parent became so obsessively focused on wanting her child to have high status. No matter how you plan to help your child obtain it, research suggests status-seeking is only advisable if you want that child to ultimately be at greater risk for overdependency on others, risky behavior, relationship problems, and unhappiness.

Perhaps the best parents can do is simply to teach their children about the two types of popularity. My own kids are only just starting school, so we’ll see how I feel when they get closer to adolescence. But for now, I’m doing my best to make sure that, at the very least, they understand that it’s fine to be popular, as long as it’s the type of popularity that will make them happy.

Almost every night, at least one of them asks me to read them the story of a race car named Lightning McQueen, who seeks fame and fortune in a championship race. Lightning has spent his entire life working to win the prized Piston Cup, and there is nothing he wants more than to come in first place and reap the many benefits of a champion: a new paint job, fancy sponsorships, and most of all hordes of fans that idolize him. But before he can pursue this dream, Lightning gets detoured to a small town called Radiator Springs, where he is forced to stay and work with its residents, a bunch of cars who are far more interested in having fun with Lightning and becoming his friends. By the end of the story, after he leaves the town, Lightning finally competes in the race he has dreamed about for so long, but he is surprised to discover that he really misses the cars in Radiator Springs. Just inches from the finish line, he decides to give up the championship and offer a selfless act of kindness to a fellow racer instead.

This is usually the part when my son asks, “Daddy, why didn’t Lightning finish the race?”

“Because no matter how long you have been racing,” I tell him, “winning will never make you happier than having good friends.”
