## CHAPTER 9

## Most Likely to Succeed

## Choosing the Type of Popularity We Want

Late one night at Foodtown, a local supermarket in the suburban town of Plainview, a sixteen-year-old boy who looked and sounded as if he was eleven picked up the store’s microphone.

“Attention, shoppers,” he announced. “The time is now 9:45, and Foodtown will be closing in just fifteen minutes.” As his high-pitched voice echoed down the aisles, customers looked over their carts. One approached the courtesy desk where the boy was placing the microphone back in its holder.

“Do you work here?” she asked, grinning. “How old are you?”

“Sixteen,” he said, pushing his glasses up.

Her expression changed. “You’re sixteen!” she shouted. “Oh, I thought you were gifted, like Doogie Howser or something.”

The boy’s announcement also served as the signal for all the teen employees of Foodtown to start making their plans for the night. It was Friday, and as was the custom, whichever stock boy whose parents were away would invite everyone over to hang out and drink cheap beer.

On this particular night it was Jason, a congenial high school senior, who walked the aisles to let everyone know the party would be at his house. Of course, he told Tony first. Tony was the quiet junior whom all of the girls working the cash registers would find excuses to talk to. If Tony wasn’t able to make it, it was hardly worth having the party at all. Jason next invited Sean, the kid who seemed to have made it through adolescence without a single sign of acne. By the time of the final announcement that the supermarket was closed, Jason had invited just about everyone. As they all quickly worked to clean up the store and get ready for the night ahead, a cashier named Sandra approached the young boy at the courtesy counter and asked him to the party, an invitation that left him speechless. Sandra, as it happened, was his first crush.

Jason seemed especially excited that the young boy would be attending. “Guess who’s coming tonight!” he called out to Sean while pointing and smiling.

That young boy, in fact, was me, and I still remember vividly that moment when the cool kids—the Jasons, the Tonys, and the Seans—wanted me to be a part of their group. I felt that at long last, despite how different I looked from the others, I would now be one of them. In my own high school, on the other side of town, the popular kids never invited me to hang out with them, much as I wished they would. They all knew me, of course: I was the guy who was still four-foot-seven in ninth grade, barely reaching five feet tall when I turned sixteen, and I wouldn’t weigh more than a hundred pounds until my sophomore year of college. I had worn bifocals since the age of five, and while everyone else was ditching school to go hang out at the beach, I dutifully attended class every day, ultimately earning the decidedly uncool Perfect Attendance Award at high school graduation for never missing a class since kindergarten. At the time, it never made sense to me why I was left out when the popular kids hung out together. I was just as cool as them, I thought.

And now, at last, I was. Sean, Tony, and Sandra left the store a few minutes later, walking through the inner set of heavy doors that normally opened automatically but now had been deactivated for closing. Then they made their way through the outer set and stood outside. Jason waited to hold the inner door open for me, and after we both walked through, he turned to lock it for the night. But then, just as I started to head outside, I felt a tug on the hood of my winter jacket. Before I realized what was happening, Jason had pushed me against the inner wall of the vestibule. Stunned, I watched him run through the second set of doors without me, and as it slammed shut, he locked the outer doors as well.

I was now trapped, unable to get back into the dark store behind me or outside, where Sean, Tony, and Jason had started banging against the door and laughing.

Of course, for a few seconds I tried to affect nonchalance and make it seem like I was in on the joke. “OK, haha. You got me.”

But as seconds turned to minutes, a pit in my stomach grew. The guys crouched down so their heads were level with my own. They yelled and pointed at me. They used singsongy voices to tease and mock me, and as my expression began to wilt, from feigned amusement to misery, they began to hold their sides from laughing so hard. I remember looking into Jason’s eyes as he made taunting faces at me through the glass. _I thought you were my friend_.

Sandra, who was standing quietly outside a few yards away, wasn’t doing anything to help. In fact, she even seemed to be giggling a little at the sight of me pushing at the doors. It was at that moment that I remember looking through the glass, thinking that life must be so much better and so much easier for those who are popular.

Why am I sharing this story? It’s because I know my experience was hardly unique. We have all had our moments of humiliation, times when we felt as if we were left out or even bullied. Studies confirm that over 80 percent of us have been victimized by our peers at some point in our childhoods. Whether it was because we were too small or too big, too smart or not clever enough, too loud or too quiet, we have all been there.

But we didn’t leave these injuries safely back in adolescence—we carry those memories with us for the rest of our lives. We may keep them private or deny their significance. But they remain with us tenaciously, sometimes as raw and sensitive as they were when we experienced them as teens. They are part of who we are, and we continue to believe, at least at some level, that being popular would make our lives better. If only we were popular, we would be more successful, wealthy, more confident, less stressed. If everyone else thought highly of us, we might feel that way about ourselves. Popular equals happy, at least in our minds.

For many, being unpopular is among the darkest of fears. Aaron Beck, the father of cognitive therapy and the recipient of the first Community Mental Health Award from the Kennedy Forum, suggested that almost every moment of anger, depression, addiction, worry, or despair we experience can be traced to what Beck called our “core beliefs” or “schema.” Beck’s former student Jeff Young discovered that there are only a dozen or so of these schema that people in every culture have in common, and many of them ultimately have some relation to popularity. We fear ending up alone, being excluded, losing the attention or support of others, or becoming unlovable. At some level, it’s these concerns about popularity that underlie so many moments when we excessively worry, overreact, or turn toward maladaptive means to make ourselves happy. If you think hard enough about the most recent occasion in which you felt particularly upset, and dig deeply enough to discern what about it made it so distressing, there’s a good chance you’ll find that it was due to some core belief that you might become unpopular.

Throughout this book, I have argued that the desire to be popular is a quintessential human experience. Whether it’s the evolutionary by-product of our ancestors’ herding instincts, now reflected in the social sensitivity of our DNA, a function of adolescent memories that have become a template for all our subsequent social interactions, or at the root of our collective psychological schema, we all share a universal desire to be regarded positively by others. Our minds, our bodies, our health, and our emotions are linked to popularity in ways that only the most current and sophisticated methods in psychology and neuroscience are now beginning to reveal.

But you have a choice: you can allow these instincts to direct you toward status or toward likability. Choosing likability is not always an easy option in a world so obsessed with status. We’re constantly invited to idolize those with status, we determine quality based on status, and we even pay attention to those with status with whom we may disagree, as if being visible, dominant, powerful, or cool are admirable qualities in their own right. We’re so tempted to obtain status for ourselves that we have invented ways that enable us to simply press buttons and strive for it on a round-the-clock basis.

Yet decades of accumulated research reviewed in this book have established that the relentless pursuit of status puts us at risk for a wide range of serious life problems, including addiction, loneliness, and depression. The efforts required to obtain status—behaviors such as aggressiveness, disregarding the feelings of others, and selfishness—should not be what we esteem for ourselves or for our society.

It turns out that the answer we are looking for is what we have known all along: the thing that will make us happiest is if we are likable. For some, likability comes easily. Their natural tendency to attract others will help them effortlessly establish new relationships, and their likability will pay dividends for years to come. But for others, being likable requires more of an effort, and after an adolescence of ostracism or exclusion, it can seem impossible. In fact, it may be these individuals who are the most heavily invested in status-seeking.

I hope this book has been successful in demonstrating that regardless of our pasts, we all have an opportunity to become more likable—maybe hundreds of opportunities each day, in fact. Doing so requires us to shed our adolescent conceptions of what’s “most popular” and return to what we learned as children. Prioritizing likability over status means choosing to help our peers rather than exclusively satisfying our own needs, showing more interest in others rather than vying for more attention and power, and cultivating relationships more than “likes.” It’s making the choice to help others feel included and welcome rather than making ourselves feel superior. Attaining the most gratifying form of popularity comes from making the effort to fit in more than trying to stand out, and from doing what we can to promote harmony rather than focusing on how to dominate others.

Becoming more likable also requires self-reflection, to understand how our teenage experiences have affected the way we behave in interpersonal relationships today. Considering how our most basic perceptions and assumptions may be biased is not easy, but doing so opens a door to a far happier life.
