# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Through writing _Popular_ , I now know what it feels like to be pregnant. It wasn’t long after this book was conceived that I began to feel nauseous. Within a few weeks, I was exhausted, and the more the Word files within my computer began to divide and grow, the more it became clear to me that I was in for a ride like none I had previously experienced. Writing a book on popularity was the fulfillment of a dream—a chance to celebrate psychological science and potentially help people all over the world live happier lives. I had no idea how much I would grow as a result of this experience, however. As the weeks turned to months, and my draft slowly expanded, I noticed that I started to see everything around me through the lens of the hypotheses I was putting forth in each chapter. The text itself encroached on my daily existence, spilling into conversations, and eventually overcoming what had been the comfortable waistband of my daily routines. By the end, I couldn’t wait to have it all finally out of my system. Now, as these words are about to be launched into the world, I must wrestle between my protective instincts and my hope that this book will survive on its own, perhaps fulfilling some of the dreams I wished for it.

I am grateful for the enormous support of three midwives who each served extraordinary roles in the delivery of my manuscript. The first is Richard Pine, who wasn’t only an outstanding agent—he also was a mentor, a colleague, a confidant, and a friend through this entire process. Richard believed in this project, and in me as an author, long before I did. As he shepherded me through each of the tasks involved in trade publishing, I was consistently struck by his actions and his character. In his role as an agent, Richard had an unwavering commitment to excellence. At every turn, I was convinced that his desire for _Popular_ to help others lead happy lives was equal to mine, and he remained committed to every last detail to make this the best book it was meant to be. He was with me for every single step with remarkable patience, limitless energy, and impeccable judgment. I can’t imagine anyone being as dedicated and supportive as Richard was throughout this process. But perhaps even more notably, working with Richard offered me a life class in confidence, kindness, and consistency. Perhaps because he himself is enormously popular, I experienced vicarious benefits simply by standing alongside Richard. He is a powerful mensch, a benevolent force of nature, and one of the most effective people I ever have met. _Popular_ would not exist without him. Special thanks also to all of Richard’s colleagues at Inkwell Management, especially Eliza Rothstein, Lyndsey Blessing, and Nathaniel Jacks, for taking me by the hand throughout this process and being so thoroughly likable.

Bill Tonelli is the guy you want to have yelling “Push!” when you feel like you may give up. His uncensored feedback on draft after draft and his unique ability to offer an honest, grounded perspective on every idea were very much appreciated. Modest, candid, and as “real” as they get, Bill was there for me whenever I needed him, and I am thankful for his guidance.

Third, I am enormously indebted to Rick Kot at Viking, who is as brilliant, thoughtful, and astute as he is gentle, amiable, and kind. Rick didn’t just edit _Popular_ ; he was an inspiration. It was his curiosity and encouragement on the day I met him that I drew upon each day as I wrote. His supportive, constructive, and enthusiastic feedback is reflected on every page. Most important, Rick nurtured me as well. I cannot imagine a better experience and I am honored that Rick was with me as _Popular_ was born. Special thanks to the whole Viking team, including Brian Tart, Andrea Schulz, Lindsay Prevette, Mary Stone, and Diego Nunez. Their collective energy has been infectious, and their expertise impressive. A very special thanks to Carolyn Coleburn for her passion, her professionalism, and her love of popularity! I am equally indebted to Whitney Peeling at Broadside for her energy, humor, and optimism.

There are so many others who also deserve credit for _Popular_ , and for the journey I experienced while writing it. First and foremost, I am consistently inspired by the amazing scientific discoveries of my colleagues, role models, and friends in the field, including Amanda Rose, Karen Rudolph, Julie Hubbard, Jaana Juvonen, Mara Brendgen, Joe Allen, Toon Cillessen, George Slavich, Paul Hastings, Ben Hankin, David Schwartz, Ernest Hodges, Bill Bukowski, Brad Brown, Jamie Ostrov, Wendy Troop-Gordon, Ron Scholte, Rutger Engles, Noel Card, Audrey Zakriski, Janis Kupersmidt, Jeff Parker, Ken Dodge, John Coie, Bill Hartup, Ken Rubin, Steve Asher, Tom Dishion, Wyndol Furman, Gary Ladd, Geertjan Overbeek, Marlene Sandstrom, Catherine Bagwell, Adrienne Nishina, Amori Mikami, Amy Bellmore, Andy Collins, Dianna Murray-Close, Doran French, Lawrence Steinberg, Jennifer Lansford, John Lochman, Barry Schneider, Dorothy Espelage, Frank Vitaro, Heidi Gazelle, Hongling Xie, Becky Kochenderfer-Ladd, Brett Laursen, Carolyn Barry, Cathryn Booth-Laforce, Sandra Graham, Scott Gest, Shelley Hymel, Marian Underwood, Martha Putallaz, Michel Boivin, Rene Veenstra, Richard Fabes, Robert Coplan, Ryan Adams, Stacey Horn, Thomas Berndt, Thomas Kindermann, Wendy Craig, Christina Salmivalli, Craig Hart, David Nelson, David Perry, Debra Peplar, Julie Bowker, Karen Bierman, Kristina McDonald, and Lara Mayeux. Nicki Crick, Phil Rodkin, and Duane Buhrmester, you left us too soon, but your legacies lives on. Steve Hinshaw, special thanks for your terrific support. To all these colleagues, and so many others I fear I may have missed: thank you. I attempted to highlight research conducted by each of you so others might be inspired by your work as much as I have.

Thank you to current and former graduate students, who always serve as my greatest source of professional joy. I continue to learn from you every day, and your encouragement as I have embarked on this crazy adventure has meant the world to me. Thanks to Sophie Choukas-Bradley, Jackie Nesi, Matteo Giletta, Laura Widman, Casey Calhoun, Adam Miller, Sarah Helms, Maya Massing-Schaffer, Sarah Owens, John Guerry, Whitney Brechwald, Caroline Adelman, Joe Franklin, Shelley Gallagher, Leigh Spivey, Chris Sheppard, Diana Rancourt, and Matt Nock for being so excited with me! A huge debt of gratitude also is due to Sam Sifrar, Ryn Linthicum, Blaire Lee-Nakayama, Matt Clayton, and Jeff Parlin for all the support and incredibly hard work with the Peer Relations Lab, so we may learn more about peer relationships. Thank you to Emmy Mallasch and her always-smiling face for making my day job so fun. And of course, thanks to all of my undergraduate students in Popularity class at Yale and at UNC. Your enthusiastic participation, incisive comments, and keen insights help me rediscover my passion for this subject matter all over again every Tuesday and Thursday.

Special thanks to my mentors, Annette La Greca and Tony Spirito. You invested in me so many years ago, and have remained dedicated advisors for decades since. The lessons you taught me extend well beyond a clinical psychology curriculum. Through your examples, you have taught me how to be a better human being.

_Popular_ was a labor of love, and it would not have been written without the love and support of so many friends who were with me throughout this journey. Jack Harari, this was your dream more than mine, but you helped me selflessly through every step. Thanks to Adam and Jackie Golden, Vicki DiLillo, Barbara Kamholz, Mike Friedman, Erika Lawrence, Doug Mennin, and Lindsey Cohen for your sage advice, perspective, and companionship. Thanks to Lois and Bobby Suruki, Jen Rutan, and Zach Purser for the Tuesday night check-ins at Moe’s. Ilene and Gabe Farkas, Anna Gassman-Pines, David Halpern, Mo Pleil, and Ryan Williams also deserve thanks for their input and encouragement. Thanks to my friends in Davie Hall, particularly Eric Youngstrom, Jon Abramowitz, Deborah Jones, Anna Bardone-Cone, Don Baucom, Don Lysle, and Kristen Lindquist for their support. Steve Reznick, I miss you. Special thanks to the growing UNC group of trade book authors who offered extremely valuable advice along the way: Barb Fredrickson, Kurt Gray, and especially my book-twin Keith Payne. Adam Grant, thanks for your willing advice and terrific publishing resources, and for serving as a role model. Gary Sosinsky, David Kraut, Alan Calderon, and Michael Cohen are owed a debt of gratitude for making my high school experience so fun; thanks also to Jami and Andrew Huber and Steve and Melissa Brooks, who have been with me through every chapter since.

Of course, I could not have written this book without my family. My mother, Judy, and my brother, Rich, as well as Dick and Etta Reigel, offered me a foundation without which nothing would have been possible. But there is one member of my family who deserves my gratitude most of all. And to her, I will forever be in awe and debt.

It’s a miracle I ever met her. In a tiny, bucolic corner of West Virginia, nestled in a valley between Cheat Mountain and the Allegheny foothills, is a tiny town called Arbovale. Just two miles from the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, it has been dubbed the nation’s “quiet zone,” where radio transmissions are strictly limited to preserve the integrity of astronomers’ work. While the rest of the world has become increasingly dependent on 24/7 access to the internet, rapid texts, and social media, the residents of Arbovale are not permitted to use cell phones, wireless internet, high-frequency radio stations, or even overpowered microwave ovens. It is a town that remains sheltered from the rest of the chattering world—about seventy-five minutes from the nearest movie theater or grocery store—and it is certainly the last place where one might go to promote their own status. Perhaps it is no coincidence that Arbovale was the home of the most likable woman whom I have ever met. Her name is Tina, and I married her. And in far more ways than I can articulate, the lessons in _Popular_ were inspired by her. She is a social phenomenon in every context—the most likable at work, in our community, no matter where we go. She brightens the day of everyone she meets, and because of her popularity, she is remarkably effective at everything she attempts. Tina embodies the power of likability. As with many authors’ spouses, Tina offered feedback on dozens of ideas and listened to countless drafts as I wrote this book. She rearranged her life to make it possible for me to begin this new adventure in mine. But most important, just by being herself, Tina made _Popular_ possible, and for me, her love became the only kind of popularity that mattered.
