# Acknowledgments

On one level writing is a solitary business. I wake up each morning and I write from about 7:30 to 1 p.m. I used to wear a Fitbit. It would tell me I was napping in the mornings. I wasn’t napping; I was writing, but I guess my heart rate dropped. The gizmo thought I was asleep, but in reality I was doing what I’m wired to do.

But I’ve been lucky, and my writing life is also embedded in institutions, filled with people who guide, help, support, and share the ride. My former _New York Times_ colleague Michal Leibowitz provided invaluable guidance as this book was coming together. She told me which parts were working and which parts weren’t—the outside view, critiquing with care. Michal has a great career in writing and editing ahead of her. My _Times_ editor Nick Fox always pushes me to clarify my arguments. When I wrote a piece for _The Times_ about my friend Peter Marks, which I’ve adapted for this book, he pushed me to get more personal, to let my emotions show.

At _The Atlantic,_ friends like Jeffrey Goldberg, Scott Stossel, and many others have pushed me to do the social analysis that led me to believe that this book is necessary—that helped me understand the social and relational crisis we are in the middle of, and what we can do about it.

I may be that rarest of creatures—an author who is entirely happy with his publisher. This is my fourth book with Penguin Random House and I’ve been well treated straight through. My editor, Andy Ward, and his team clarified my thinking on nearly every page and provided the kind of intellectual and emotional support that any writer needs to keep going. This is my fourth book with London King, who helps get my books out into the world. I tell London that I know almost nobody who is as good at their job as London is good at hers. This book has also benefitted from two exceptional editors, fact checkers, and all around smart readers, Bonnie Thompson and Hilary McClellan.

I had the chance to teach the subject of this book at Yale’s Jackson School of Global Affairs, even though the topic is only tenuously related to global affairs. My students, who ranged from college students to Marines to environmental scientists to social entrepreneurs, deepened my thinking, warmed my heart, and reminded me again and again that it really is fun to get to know people.

Many of my friends read drafts of this book, and offered wise advice that, frankly, spared me from going seriously off course. In particular, I’d like to thank Pete Wehner, David Bradley, Gary Haugen, Francis Collins, Yuval Levin, Mark Labberton, Philip Yancy, Andrew Steer, James Forsyth, and Russell Moore. Two members of our merry band died as I was finishing this book, Michael Gerson and Tim Keller. I treasure the memories of our conversations and miss them terribly.

Books like this don’t get written without experts. I’m grateful to all those who returned my calls, especially Nick Epley, Lisa Feldman Barrett, Dan McAdams, Lori Gottlieb, Tracy Kidder, Robert Kegan, and many others.

My two oldest friends in the world are Peter Marks and his wife, Jenifer McShane. We’ve known and loved each other practically all our lives. When Pete died in 2022, Jen and her boys, Owen and James, bravely let me tell Pete’s story. I hope we’ve helped many people understand depression a little better, and how to walk with people who are enduring it. I lack the words to fully convey my admiration for Jen, Owen, and James.

My children, Joshua, Naomi, and Aaron, were once kids, playing and growing. Now they’re adults—comrades through life, shaping my thoughts and hopes. This book wouldn’t exist without my wife, Anne Snyder Brooks; in part because I wouldn’t remotely be the kind of person capable of writing it. Anne is a writer too, and the editor of _Comment_ magazine. You put two writers in a house, and you’d think things would be quiet and lonely. But thanks to her generous and transcendent nature, and a lot of hard work, our house is perpetually filled with friends and guests, with music, games, sports, and conversation. I seem to spend my years writing books Anne doesn’t need. She is already loving, other-centered and perceptive, gifted at making others feel seen, truly a delight to all who know her, wise in ways that can’t be learned from books, generous in ways you can’t manufacture through some formula—but which emerge as fruits of the spirit.
